

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title:      The Greek Poropulos
Author:     Edgar Wallace
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0601361.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          June 2006
Date most recently updated: June 2006

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Greek Poropulos
Author:     Edgar Wallace




At Carolina, in the Transvaal, was a store kept by a man named Lioski,
who was a Polish Jew. There was an officers' clubhouse, the steward of
which was a Greek sportsman named Poropulos, and this story is about
these two men, and about an officer of Hampton's Scouts who took too
much wine and saw a pair of boots.

I have an intense admiration for George Poropulos, and I revere his
memory. I admire him for his nerve; though, for the matter of that, his
nerve was no greater than mine.

Long before the war came, when the negotiations between Great Britain
and the Transvaal Government were in the diplomatic stage, I drifted to
Carolina from the Rand, leaving behind me in the golden city much of
ambition, hope, and all the money I had brought with me from England. I
came to South Africa with a young wife and £370--within a few
shillings--because the doctors told me the only chance I had was in such
a hot, dry climate as the highlands of Africa afforded. For my own part,
there was a greater attraction in the possibility of turning those few
hundreds of mine into thousands, for Johannesburg was in the delirium of
a boom.

I left Johannesburg nearly penniless. I could not, at the moment,
explain the reason of my failure, for the boom continued, and I had the
advantage of the expert advice of Arthur Lioski, who was staying at the
same boarding house as myself.

There were malicious people who warned me against Lioski. His own
compatriots, sharp men of business, told me to 'ware Lioski, but I
ignored the advice because I was very confident in my own judgment, and
Lioski was a plausible, handsome man, a little flashy in appearance, but
decidedly a beautiful animal.

He was in Johannesburg on a holiday, he said. He had stores in various
parts of the country where he sold everything from broomsticks to farm
wagons, and he bore the evidence of his prosperity.

He took us to the theater, or rather he took Lillian, for I was too
seedy to go out much. I did not grudge Lillian the pleasure. Life was
very dull for a young girl whose middle-aged husband had a spot on his
lung, and Lioski was so kind and gentlemanly, so far as Lil was
concerned, that the only feeling I had in the matter was one of
gratitude.

He was tall and dark, broad-shouldered, with a set to his figure and a
swing of carriage that excited my admiration. He was possessed of
enormous physical strength, and I have seen him take two quarreling
Kaffirs--men of no ordinary muscularity--and knock their heads together.

He had an easy, ready laugh, a fund of stories, some a little coarse, I
thought, and a florid gallantry which must have been attractive to
women. Lil always brightened up wonderfully after an evening with him.

His knowledge of mines and mining propositions was bewildering. I left
all my investments in his hands, and it proves something of my trust in
him, that when, day by day, he came to me for money, to "carry over"
stock--whatever that means--I paid without hesitation. Not only did I
lose every penny I possessed, but I found myself in debt to him to the
extent of a hundred pounds.

Poor Lil! I broke the news to her of my ruin, and she took it badly;
reproached, stormed, and wept in turn, but quieted down when I told her
that in the kindness of his heart, Lioski had offered me a berth at his
Carolina store. I was to get a £16 a month, half of which was to be
paid in stores at wholesale prices and the other half in cash. I was to
live rent free in a little house near the store. I was delighted with the
offer. It was an immediate rise, though I foresaw that the conditions of
life would be much harder than the life to which I had been accustomed
in England. We traveled down the Delagoa line to Middleburg, and found a
Cape cart waiting to carry us across the twenty miles of rolling veldt.
The first six months in Carolina were the happiest I have ever spent.
The work in the store was not particularly arduous. I found that it had
the reputation of being one of the best-equipped stores in the Eastern
Transvaal, and certainly we did a huge business for so small a place. It
was not on the town we depended, but upon the surrounding country.
Lioski did not come back with us, but after we had been installed for a
week he came and took his residence in the store.


All went well for six months. He taught Lil to ride and drive, and every
morning they went cantering over the veldt together. Me he treated more
like a brother than an employee, and I found myself hotly resenting the
uncharitable things that were said about him, for Carolina, like other
small African towns, was a hotbed of gossip.

Lil was happy for that six months, and then I began to detect a change
in her attitude toward me. She was snappy, easily offended, insisted
upon having her own room--to which I agreed, for, although my chest was
better, I still had an annoying cough at night which might have been a
trial to anybody within hearing.

It was about this time that I met Poropulos. He came into the store on a
hot day in January, a little man of forty-five or thereabouts. He was
unusually pale, and had a straggling, weedy beard. His hair was long,
his clothes were old and stained, and so much of his shirt as was
revealed at his throat was sadly in need of laundering.

Yet he was cheerful and _debonair_--and singularly flippant. He stalked
in the store, looked around critically, nodded to me, and smiled. Then
he brought his _sjambok_ down on the counter with a smack.

"Where's Shylock?" he asked easily.

I am afraid that I was irritated.

"Do you mean Mr. Lioski?"

"Shylock, I said," he repeated. "Shylockstein, the Lothario of
Carolina." He smacked the counter again, still smiling.

I was saved the trouble of replying, for at that moment Lioski entered.
He stopped dead and frowned when he saw the Greek.

"What do you want, you little beast," he asked harshly.

For answer, the man leaned up against the counter, ran his fingers
through his straggling beard, and cocked his head.

"I want justice," he said unctuously--"the restoration of money stolen.
I want to send a wreath to your funeral: I want to write your
biography----"

"Clear out," shouted Lioski. His face was purple with anger, and he
brought his huge fist down upon the counter with a crash that shook the
wooden building.

He might have been uttering the most pleasant of compliments, for all
the notice the Greek took.

Crash! went Lioski's fist on the counter.

Smash! came Poropulos's _sjambok_, and there was something mocking and
derisive in his action that made Lioski mad.

With one spring he was over the counter, a stride and he had his hand on
the Greek's collar--and then he stepped back quickly with every drop of
blood gone from his face, for the Greek's knife had flashed under his
eyes. I thought Lioski was stabbed, but it was fear that made him white.

The Greek rested the point of the knife on the counter and twiddled it
round absentmindedly, laying his palm on the hilt and spinning it with
great rapidity.

"Nearly did it that time, my friend," he said, with a note of regret,
"nearly did it that time--I shall be hanged for you yet."

Lioski was white and shaking.

"Come in here," he said in a low voice, and the little Greek followed
him to the back parlor. They were together for about an hour; sometimes
I could hear Mr. Lioski's voice raised angrily, sometimes Poropulos's
little laugh. When they came out again the Greek was smiling still and
smoking one of my employer's cigars.

"My last word to you," said Lioski huskily, "is this--keep your mouth
closed and keep away from me."

"And my last word to you," said Poropulos, jauntily puffing at the
cigar, "is this--turn honest, and enjoy a sensation."

He stepped forth from the store with the air of one who had gained a
moral victory.

I never discovered what hold the Greek had over my master. I gatherered
that at some time or another, Poropulos had lost money, and that he held
Lioski responsible.

In some mysterious way Poropulos and I became friends. He was an
adventurer of a type. He bought and sold indifferent mining
propositions, took up contracts, and, I believe, was not above engaging
in the Illicit Gold Buying business. His attitude to Lillian was one of
complete adoration. When he was with her his eyes never left her face.

It was about this time that my great sorrow came to me. Lioski went away
to Durban--to buy stock, he said--and a few days afterwards Lillian, who
had become more and more exigent, demanded to be allowed to go to Cape
Town for a change.

I shall remember that scene.

I was at breakfast in the store when she came in. She was white, I
thought, but her pallor suited her, with her beautiful black hair and
great dark eyes.

She came to the point without any preliminary. "I want to go away," she
said.

I looked up in surprise.

"Go away, dear? Where?"

She was nervous. I could see that from the restless movement of her
hands.

"I want to go to--to Cape Town--I know a girl there--I'm sick of this
place--I hate it!"

She stamped her foot, and I thought that she was going to break into a
fit of weeping. Her lips trembled, and for a time she could not control
her voice.

"I am going to be ill if you don't let me go," she said at last. "I can
feel----"

"But the money, dear," I said, for it was distressing to me that I could
not help her toward the holiday she wanted.

"I can find the money," she said, in an unsteady voice. "I have got a
few pounds saved--the allowance you gave me for my clothes--I didn't
spend it all--let me go, Charles--please, please!"

I drove her to the station, and took her ticket for Pretoria. I would
have taken her to the capital, but I had the store to attend to.

"By the way, what will your address be?" I asked just as the train was
moving off.

She was leaning over the gate of the car platform, looking at me
strangely.

"I will wire it--I have it in my bag," she called out, and I watched the
tail of the train round the curve, with an aching heart. There was
something wrong; what it was I could not understand. Perhaps I was a
fool. I think I was.

I think I have said that I had made friends with Poropulos. Perhaps it
would be more truthful to say that he made friends with me, for he had
to break down my feeling of distrust and disapproval. Then, again, I was
not certain how Mr. Lioski would regard such a friendship, but, to my
surprise, he took very little notice of it or, for the matter of that,
of me.

Poropulos came into the store the night my wife left. Business was
slack; there was war in the air, rumors of ultimatums had been
persistent, and the Dutch farmers had avoided the store.


A week passed, and I began to worry, for I had not heard from Lil. I had
had a letter from Lioski, telling me that in view of the unsettled
condition of the country he was extending his stay in Durban for a
fortnight. The letter gave me the fullest instructions as to what I was
to do in case war broke out, but, unfortunately, I had no opportunity of
putting them into practice.

The very day I received the letter, a Boer commando rode into Carolina,
and at the head of it rode the Landrost Peter du Huis, a pleasant man,
whom I knew slightly. He came straight to the store, dismounted, and
entered.

"Good morning, Mr. Gray," he said. "I fear that I come on unpleasant
business."

"What is that?" I asked.

"I have come to commandeer your stock in the name of the Republic," he
said, "and to give you the tip to clear out."

It does not sound possible, but it is nevertheless a fact that in two
hours I had left Carolina, leaving Lioski's store in the hands of the
Boers, and bringing with me receipts signed by the Landrost for the
goods he had commandeered. In four hours I was in a cattle truck with a
dozen other refugees on my way to Pretoria--for I had elected to go to
Durban to inform Lioski at first hand of what had happened.

Of the journey down to the coast it is not necessary to speak. We were
sixty hours _en route_; we were without food, and had little to drink.
At Ladysmith I managed to get a loaf of bread and some milk; at
Maritzburg I got my first decent meal. But I arrived in Durban, tired,
dispirited, and hungry. Lioski was staying at the Royal, and as soon as
I got to the station I hailed a _ricksha_ to take me there.

There had been no chance of telegraphing. The wires were blocked with
government messages. We had passed laden troop trains moving up to the
frontier, and had cheered the quiet men in khaki who were going, all of
them, to years of hardship and privation, many of them to death.

The vestibule of the Royal was crowded, but I made my way to the office.

"Lioski?" said the clerk. "Mr. and Mrs. Lioski, No. 84--you'll find your
way to their sitting room."

I went slowly up the stairs, realizing in a flash the calamity.

I did not blame Lil; it was a hard life I had brought her to. I had been
selfish, as sick men are selfish, inconsiderate.

They stood speechless, as I opened the door and entered. I closed the
door behind me. Still they stood, Lil as pale as death, with terror and
shame in her eyes, Lioski in a black rage.

"Well?" It was he who broke the silence.

He was defiant, shameless, and as I went on to talk about what had
happened at the store, making no reference to what I had seen, his lips
curled contemptuously.

But Lil, womanlike, rushed in with explanations. She had meant to go to
Cape Town--the train service had been bad--she had decided to go to
Durban--Mr. Lioski had been kind enough to book her a room----

I let her go on. When she had finished I handed my receipts to Lioski.

"That ends our acquaintance, I think."

"As you like," he replied with a shrug.

I turned to Lillian.

"Come, my dear," I said, but she made no move, and I saw Lioski smile
again.

I lost all control over myself and leaped at him, but his big fist
caught me before I could reach him, and I went down, half stunned. I was
no match for him. I knew that, and if the blow did nothing else, it
sobered me. I picked myself up. I was sick with misery and hate.

"Come, Lil," I said again.

She was looking at me, and I thought I saw a look of disgust in her
face. I did not realize that I was bleeding, and that I must have been a
most unpleasant figure. I only knew that she loathed me at that moment,
and I turned on my heel and left them, my own wife and the big man who
had broken me.

One forgets things in war time. I joined the Imperial Light Horse and
went to the front. The doctor passed me as sound, so I suppose that all
that is claimed for the climate of Africa is true.

We went into Ladysmith, and I survived the siege. I was promoted for
bringing an officer out of action under fire. I earned a reputation for
daring, which I did not deserve, because always I was courting swift
death, and taking risks to that end.

Before Buller's force had pushed a way through the stubborn lines to our
relief, I had received my commission. More wonderful to me, I found
myself a perfectly healthy man, as hard as nails, as callous as the
most-experienced soldier. Only, somewhere down in my heart, a little
worm gnawed all the time; sleeping or waking, fighting or resting, I
thought of Lillian, and wondered, wondered, wondered.

Ladysmith was relieved. We marched on toward Pretoria. I was transferred
to Hampton's Horse with the rank of major, and for eighteen months I
moved up and down the Eastern Transvaal chasing a will-othe-wisp of a
commandant, who was embarrassing the blockhouse lines.

Then one day I came upon Poropulos.

We were encamped outside Standerton when he rode in on a sorry-looking
Burnto pony. He had been in the country during the war, he said, buying
and selling horses. He did not mention Lioski's name to me, and so
studiously did he avoid referring to the man, that I saw at once that he
knew.

It was brought home to me by his manner that he had a liking for me that
I had never guessed. In what way I had earned his regard I cannot say,
but it was evident he entertained a real affection for me.

We parted after an hour's chat--he was going back to Carolina. He had a
scheme for opening an officers' club in that town, where there was
always a large garrison, and to which the wandering columns came from
time to time to be re-equipped.

As for me, I continued the weary chase of the flying commando. Trek,
trek, trek, in fierce heat, in torrential downpour, over smooth veldt
and broken hills, skirmishing, sniping, and now and then a sharp
engagement, with a dozen casualties on either side.

Four months passed, and the column was ordered into Carolina for a
refit. I went without qualms, though I knew she was there, and Lioski
was there.

We got into Carolina in a thunderstorm, and the men were glad to reach a
place that bore some semblance of civilization. My brother officers,
after our long and profitless trek, were overjoyed at the prospect of a
decent dinner--for Poropulos's club was already famous among the
columns.

My horse picked up a stone and went dead lame, so I stayed behind to
doctor him, and rode to Carolina two hours after the rest of the column
had arrived.

It was raining heavily as I came over a fold of the hill that showed the
straggling township. There was no human being in sight save a woman who
stood by the roadside, waiting, and I knew instinctively, long before I
reached her, that it was Lillian. I cantered toward her. Her face was
turned in my direction, and she stood motionless as I drew rein and
swung myself to the ground.

She was changed, not as I expected, for sorrow and suffering had
etherealized her. Her big eyes burned in a face that was paler than
ever, her lips, once so red and full, were almost white.

"I have been waiting for you," she said.

"Have you, dear? You are wet."

She shook her head impatiently. I slipped off my mackintosh and put it
about her.

"He has turned me out," she said.

She did not cry. I think she had not recovered from the shock. Something
stirred from the thin cloak she was wearing; a feeble cry was muffled by
the wrapping.

"I have got a little girl," she said, "but she is dying." She began to
cry silently, the tears running down her wet face in streams.

I took her into Carolina, and found a Dutchwoman who put her and the
baby to bed, and gave her some coffee.

I went up to the officers' club just after sunset and met Poropulos
coming down.

He was in a terrible rage, and was muttering to himself in some tongue I
could not understand.

"Oh, here you are!"--he almost spat the words in his anger--"that dog
Lioski----"

He was about to say something, but checked himself. I think it was about
Lillian that he intended to speak at first, but he changed the subject
to another grievance. "I was brought before the magistrate and fined
£100 for selling field-force tobacco. My club will be ruined--Lioski
informed the police--by----"

He was incoherent in his passion. I gather that he had been engaged in
some shady business, and that Lioski had detected him. He almost danced
before me in the rain.

"Shylock dies tonight," he said, and waved his enemy out of the world
with one sweep of his hand. "He dies tonight--I am weary of him--for
eighteen--nineteen years I have known him, and he's dirt right
through----"

He went out without another word. I stood on the slope of the hill
watching him.

I dined at the club, and went straight back to the house where I had
left my wife. She was sleeping--but the baby was dead. Poor little
mortal! I owed it no grudge, but I was glad when they told me.

All the next day I sat by her bed listening to Lillian's mutterings, for
she was very ill. I suffered all the tortures of a damned soul sitting
there, for she spoke of Lioski--"Arthur" she called him--prayed to him
for mercy--told him she loved him----

I was late for dinner at the club. There was a noisy crowd there. Young
Harvey of my own regiment had had too much to drink, and I avoided his
table.

My hand shook as I poured out a glass of wine, and somebody remarked on
it.

I did not see Poropulos until the dinner was halfway through. Curiously
enough, I looked at the clock as he came in, and the hands pointed to
half past eight.

The Greek was steward of the club, and was serving the wine. He was
calm, impassive, remarkably serene, I thought. He exchanged jokes with
the officers who were grumbling that they had had to wait for the
fulfillment of their orders.

"It was ten to eight when I ordered this," grumbled one man.

Then, suddenly, Harvey, who had been regarding Poropulos with drunken
gravity, pointed downward.

"He's changed his boots," he said, and chuckled. Poropulos smiled
amiably and went on serving. "He's changed his boots!" repeated Harvey,
concentrating his mind upon trivialities as only a drunken man can. The
men laughed. "Oh, dry up, Harvey!" said somebody.

"He's changed----"

He got no further. Through the door came a military policeman, splashed
from head to foot with mud.

"District Commandant here, sir?" he demanded. "There's been a man
murdered."

"Soldier?" asked a dozen voices.

"No, sir--storekeeper, name of Lioski--shot dead half an hour ago."

I do not propose to tell in detail all that happened following that. Two
smart C. I. D. men came down from Johannesburg, made a few inquiries,
and arrested Poropulos. He was expecting the arrest, and half an hour
before the officers came he asked me to go to him.

I spent a quarter of an hour with him, and what we said is no man's
business but ours. He told me something that startled me--he loved
Lillian, too. I had never guessed it, but I did not doubt him. But it
was finally for Lillian's sake that he made me swear an oath so dreadful
that I cannot bring myself to write it down--an oath so unwholesome, and
so against the grain of a man, that life after it could only be a matter
of sickness and shame.

Then the police came and took him away.

Lioski had been shot dead in the store by some person who had walked in
when the store was empty, at a time when there was nobody in the street.
This person had shot the Jew dead and walked out again. The police
theory was that Poropulos had gone straight from the club, in the very
middle of dinner, had committed the murder, and returned to continue his
serving, and the crowning evidence was the discovery that he had changed
his boots between 7.30 and 8.30. The mud-stained boots were found in a
cellar, and the chain of evidence was completed by the statement of a
trooper who had seen the Greek walking from the direction of the store,
at 8.10, with a revolver in his hand.

Poropulos was cheerful to the last--cheerful through the trial, through
the days of waiting in the fort at Johannesburg.

"I confess nothing," he said to the Greek priest. "I hated Lioski, and I
am glad that he is dead, that is all. It is true that I went down to
kill him, but it was too late."

When they pinioned him he turned to me.

"I have left my money to you," he said. "There is about four thousand
pounds. You will look after her."

"That is the only reason I am alive."

"Did you murder Arthur Lioski?" said the priest again.

"No," said Poropulos, and smiled as he went to his death. And what he
said was true, as I know. I shot Lioski.


THE END




Project Gutenberg Australia


