

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: Bloody Blanche
Author: Marcel Schwob
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0606371.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: August 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Bloody Blanche
Marcel Schwob



When Guillaume de Flavy grew weary of warfare and politics, he decided
to increase his fortunes by taking a wife. He was a big strong man,
broad-shouldered, with a hairy and bosomy chest. He could grab two
armed knights, one with each hand, and force them both to the ground.

He used to strap on his leggings and go around his lands in person,
right through the mire, clapping his heavy hand upon the backs of the
muddied men who stooped among the furrows.

His broad face was flushed with the blood that always throbbed at his
temples; and he used to crack the bones between his teeth when eating
meat.

One day, riding within the borders of his meadows near Rheims, he saw
the fields belonging to Robert d'Ovrebreuc. He dismounted and entered
the great hall of the house. The enormous chests arranged along the
walls, each one big enough to climb into, looked shabby; the dining
table was rickety, the fire-irons were rusts, and the spit was coated
with dirt an inch thick. Here and there he noticed a cobbler's apron,
awls, and some flat hammers; and there was a man sitting cross-legged
in a corner darning a coarse linen shirt. But then, squatting on the
hearthstones, staring directly at him in surprise, with golden hair
strewn about her pallid face, a little girl turned her head towards
Guillaume de Flavy. She might have been ten years old: her chest was
flat, her limbs scrawny, her hands tiny; but her mouth was a woman's,
sliced across her pale face like a bloody gash.

It was Blanche d'Ovrebreuc, whose father had within the last few days
succeeded to the title of vicomte d'Acy. Hump-backed and long in the
beard, his hands now fit only for handling tools, he regarded his
fiefs with the startled and worried appearance of a man handling a
dangerous object. The English squire Jacques de Béthune, who served
under Luxembourg, had already come asking for his daughter, but her
father was undecided, not knowing whether he could expect a better
offer. The estate he had inherited was saddled with debts of three
hundred thousand crowns, the late vicomte d'Acy having himself
frittered away a good ten thousand.

Perhaps the English or the Luxemburgers could take care of that.

But it was Guillaume de Flavy who carried little Blanche away. He paid
off the debts in order to keep hold of the lands. Once he had wed her
legally, he promised to delay their true marriage for three years. And
so, being an impressive-looking man, he got his hands on d'Aey's
estates and on this scrawny, lawless child. Three months later little
Blanche was wandering around the castle like a diseased cat, scowling
through deadened eyes, having undergone the cruel nuptials of
Guillaume de Flavy.

She did not, and could not, understand, being so very different in
years and in nature. The man was hard on her, as he was on his barber:
at mealtimes, when he had wiped his mouth on the back of his hand, he
flung the food he no longer wanted in the grovelling barber's face. He
yelled and cursed continually, keeping his wine and victuals in his
own clutches. He would gather all the plates in front of him, leaving
Blanche's father and mother at each end of the table. The mother was
already feeble-minded and skeletal--she lived on for a while, scarcely
ever eating or speaking, old and incoherent, then became sickly pale,
and died. The father, wasting away as if he had taken poison, signed
some deeds in Flavy's favour, under the influence of drink: he had
given up his debt-encumbered estates, and now rubbed his hands
together purring over his handsome pension. But now that he was no
longer fed, he wanted money. The poor frightened creature protested
feebly, and composed in his trembling hand a list of complaints to the
king.

Guillaume intercepted these papers; the old man wailed, and the
servants put him in a dungeon.

Letting some daylight into it a month later, they found a dried-up
corpse, its teeth stuck into a shoe from which the rats had gnawed
away the toe.

Little Blanche became uncommonly greedy. She would eat sweets until
she dropped, and her cruel red mouth was stuffed with plump pies and
cream. Leaning over the table with her eyes up against her food,
always staring glassily, she would gobble away at great speed; then
she would throw back her head and gulp down great mouthfuls of
Burgundy, bringing a visible wave of pleasure through her face. She
would upend a goblet of wine down into her gaping mouth, hold it in
her puffed-up cheeks without swallowing, and squirt it out into the
faces of the guests like a living fountain. After the meal, she would
stagger to her feet, fuddled with drink, and do it against the wall
standing up like a man.

These habits appealed to Aurbandac the Bastard, a swarthy and sinister
man whose eyebrows met in a straight line over his nose. He often came
to see Flavy, who was a kinsman, and whose lands he coveted
impatiently. Lithe, wiry, strong as steel in arms and legs, he
cunningly sized up Guillaume's cumbersome body. But little Blanche was
not aroused by him; so he delicately raised the subject of her
clothes, expressing his surprise to see her still wearing her wedding
gown, for he could tell that she had grown since then. He mentioned
some young townswomen who had scarlet dresses of Mechlin lace and
squirrel-fur linings, with long sleeves and a hood trailing red or
green silks down to the ground from its elongated peak. She listened
as if he were telling her about a doll's clothes. Then Aurbandac the
Bastard picked up a glass to join her in a toast, and got her drinking
and laughing, plying her with sweets and poking fun at her husband, so
that she splashed the wine about like a bird bathing and flapping in a
puddle.

The barber, his long face scarred by mutton-bones, leant between them,
at the Bastard's ear.

They plotted to seize the castle: it would be the Bastard's to keep,
while the wife in her innocence would be anyone's, so long as she had
the key to the cellar and the pantry.

One evening, Guillaume de Flay injured his face, tripping on the
threshold and opening up a wound across his cheek and nose. He called
out for the barber, who instantly brought in strange-smelling
medicated bandages. As the night wore on, Guillaume's face bulged up:
his tightly stretched skin was turning white with brown flecks, his
protruding eves were running all the time, and his wound looked
loathesomely gangrenous.

Throughout the next morning he stayed in an armchair, howling with
pain. Little Blanche seemed to be so terrified that she forgot to
drink; and from the other end of the room she watched Guillaume with
her limpid eyes, while her bright red lips twitched feebly.

Hardly had Guillaume gone upstairs to bed, watched over by the squire
Bastoigne, when the castle echoed with a thousand slight noises.
Blanche listened, with one ear to the door and a finger pressed to her
lips. A muffled clashing of coats of mail could be heard, the dull
jarring of arms, the creaking of the grille to the heavy postern-gate,
and an unaccustomed crackling in the courtyard; a number of mysterious
lights from lanterns came and went. Meanwhile the pitch torches in the
great hall where joints of meat were always served up burned with an
upright flame, sending a long thread of smoke up through the placid
air.

Blanche climbed the stairs to her husband's bedchamber on childish
tiptoes; he was sleeping on his back, his puffed-up features heavily
bandaged and facing the rafters. Bastoigne left, because Blanche made
as if to get into bed. And in fact she did slip into it, clasping that
fearsome head in her arms and fondling it. Guillaume was breathing
with difficulty, in fitful gasps. Then little Blanche threw herself
across him, snatched the pillow, held it firmly on to his swaddled
face, and then slid open a Judas-trap above the bed, which was usually
kept sealed up.

The swarthy head of the Bastard poked through it, as he crept in
cautiously. With one bound, he was kneeling on Guillaume's chest, and
he bludgeoned him twice, then three times, with a cloven staff he
carried with him. The man burst out of the sheets, sending out a
dreadful yell from his swollen mouth. But as Bastoigne opened the
door, the barber emerged from under the bed and tackled him; and the
Bastard slit Guillaume's throat with the broad dagger he wore on his
belt. The corpse jerked upright and rolled on to the ground, pulling
little Blanche with it; she stayed there on the floor, pinned down by
the still-warm corpse, drenched in the tepid blood flowing from its
throat--because her dress was caught under her dying husband, and she
was not strong enough to pull herself free.

While the Bastard dashed to the window, the barber considerately
helped little Blanche to her feet; and since Blanche d'Ovrebreuc,
vicomtesse d'Acy, was a religious soul, she wiped her mouth and her
husband's face with her Picardy hood, placed it over his swollen face,
and recited in her childish voice three Our Fathers and one Hail Mary,
amid the yelling of the Bastard's men, who were busy ransacking the
coffers.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


