

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The White Wolf and more
Author: Frederick Marryat
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0606061.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: August 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


The White Wolf and more
Frederick Marryat



Table of Contents

The White Wolf of the Hartz Mountains
The Legend of the Bell Rock



THE WHITE WOLF OF THE HARTZ MOUNTAINS

Scarcely had the soldiers performed their task, and thrown down their
shovels, when they commenced an altercation. It appeared that this
money was to be again the cause of slaughter and bloodshed. Philip and
Krantz determined to sail immediately in one of the peroquas, and
leave them to settle their disputes as they pleased. He asked
permission of the soldiers to take from the provisions and water, of
which there was ample supply, a larger proportion than was their
share; stating, that he and Krantz had a long voyage and would require
it, and pointing out to them that there were plenty of cocoa-nuts for
their support. The soldiers, who thought of nothing but their newly-
acquired wealth, allowed him to do as he pleased; and, having hastily
collected as many cocoa-nuts as they could, to add to their stock of
provisions, before noon, Philip and Krantz had embarked and made sail
in the peroqua, leaving the soldiers with their knives again drawn,
and so busy in their angry altercation as to be heedless of their
departure.

"There will be the same scene over again, I expect," observed Krantz,
as the vessel parted swiftly from the shore.

"I have little doubt of it; observe, even now they are at blows and
stabs."

"If I were to name that spot, it should be the 'Accursed Isle .'"

"Would not any other be the same, with so much to inflame the passions
of men?"

"Assuredly: what a curse is gold!"

"And what a blessing!" replied Krantz. "I am sorry Pedro is left with
them."

"It is their destiny," replied Philip; "so let's think no more of
them. Now what do you propose? With this vessel, small as she is, we
may sail over these seas in safety, and we have, I imagine, provisions
sufficient for more than a month."

"My idea is, to run into the track of the vessels going to the
westward, and obtain a passage to Goa."

"And if we do not meet with any, we can, at all events, proceed up the
Straits, as far as Pulo Penang without risk. There we may safely
remain until a vessel passes."

"I agree with you; it is our best, nay our only, place; unless,
indeed, we were to proceed to Cochin, where junks are always leaving
for Goa."

"But that would be out of our way, and the junks cannot well pass us
in the Straits, without their being seen by us."

They had no difficulty in steering their course; the islands by day,
and the clear stars by night, were their compass. It is true that they
did not follow the more direct track, but they followed the more
secure, working up the smooth waters, and gaining to the northward
more than to the west. Many times they were chased by the Malay proas
which infested the islands, but the swiftness of their little peroqua
was their security; indeed, the chase was, generally speaking,
abandoned as soon as the smallness of the vessel was made out by the
pirates, who expected that little or no booty was to be gained.

That Amine and Philip's mission was the constant theme of their
discourse, may easily be imagined. One morning, as they were sailing
between the isles, with less wind than usual, Philip observed:

"Krantz, you said that there were events in your own life, or
connected with it, which would corroborate the mysterious tale I
confided to you. Will you now tell me to what you referred?"

"Certainly," replied Krantz; "I've often thought of doing so, but one
circumstance or another has hitherto prevented me; this is, however, a
fitting opportunity. Prepare, therefore, to listen to a strange story,
quite as strange, perhaps, as your own:--

"I take it for granted, that you have heard people speak of the Hartz
Mountains," observed Krantz.

"I have never heard people speak of them, that I can recollect,"
replied Philip; "but I have read of them in some book, and of the
strange things which have occurred there."

"It is indeed a wild region," rejoined Krantz, "and many strange tales
are told of it; but strange as they are, I have good reason for
believing them to be true. I have told you, Philip, that I fully
believe in your communion with the other world---that I credit the
history of your father, and the lawfulness of your mission; for that
we are surrounded, impelled, and worked upon by beings different in
their nature from ourselves, I have had full evidence, as you will
acknowledge, when I state what has occurred in my own family. Why such
malevolent beings as I am about to speak of, should be permitted to
interfere with us, and punish, I may say, comparatively unoffending
mortals, is beyond my comprehension; but that they are so permitted is
most certain."

"The great principle of all evil fulfils his work of evil; why, then,
not the other minor spirits of the same class?" inquired Philip. "What
matters it to us, whether we are tried by, and have to suffer from,
the enmity of our fellow-mortals, or whether we are persecuted by
beings more powerful and more malevolent than ourselves? We know that
we have to work out our salvation, and that we shall be judged
according to our strength; if then there be evil spirits who delight
to oppress man, there surely must be, as Amine asserts, good spirits,
whose delight is to do him service. Whether, then, we have to struggle
against our passions only, or whether we have to struggle not only
against our passions, but also the dire influence of unseen enemies,
we ever struggle with the same odds in our favour, as the good are
stronger than the evil which we combat. In either case we are on the
'vantage ground, whether, as in the first, we fight the good cause
single-handed, or as in the second, although opposed, we have the host
of Heaven ranged on our side. Thus are the scales of Divine justice
evenly balanced, and man is still a free agent, as his own virtuous or
vicious propensities must ever decide whether he shall gain or lose
the victory."

"Most true," replied Krantz, "and now to my history:--

"My father was not born, or originally a resident, in the Hartz
Mountains; he was the serf of an Hungarian nobleman, of great
possessions, in Transylvania; but, although a serf, he was not by any
means a poor or illiterate man. In fact, he was rich and his
intelligence and respectability were such, that he had been raised by
his lord to the stewardship; but, whoever may happen to be born a
serf, a serf must he remain, even though he become a wealthy man: and
such was the condition of my father. My father had been married for
about five years; and by his marriage had three children---my eldest
brother Caesar, myself (Hermann), and a sister named Marcella. You
know, Philip, that Latin is still the language spoken in that country;
and that will account for our high-sounding names. My mother was a
very beautiful woman, unfortunately more beautiful than virtuous: she
was seen and admired by the lord of the soil; my father was sent away
upon some mission; and, during his absence, my mother, flattered by
the attentions, and won by the assiduities, of this nobleman, yielded
to his wishes. It so happened that my father returned very
unexpectedly, and discovered the intrigue. The evidence of my mother's
shame was positive; he surprised her in the company of her seducer!
Carried away by the impetuosity of his feelings, he watched the
opportunity of a meeting taking place between them, and murdered both
his wife and her seducer. Conscious that, as a serf, not even the
provocation which he had received would be allowed as a justification
of his conduct, he hastily collected together what money he could lay
his hands upon, and, as we were then in the depth of winter, he put
his horses to the sleigh, and taking his children with him, he set off
in the middle of the night, and was far away before the tragical
circumstance had transpired. Aware that he would be pursued, and that
he had no chance of escape if he remained in any portion of his native
country (in which the authorities could lay hold of him), he continued
his flight without intermission until he had buried himself in the
intricacies and seclusion of the Hartz Mountains. Of course, all that
I have now told you I learned afterwards. My oldest recollections are
knit to a rude, yet comfortable cottage, in which I lived with my
father, brother, and sister. It was on the confines of one of those
vast forests which cover the northern part of Germany; around it were
a few acres of ground, which, during the summer months, my father
cultivated, and which, though they yielded a doubtful harvest, were
sufficient for our support. In the winter we remained much indoors,
for, as my father followed the chase, we were left alone, and the
wolves, during that season, incessantly prowled about. My father had
purchased the cottage, and land about it, of one of the rude
foresters, who gain their livelihood partly by hunting, and partly by
burning charcoal, for the purpose of smelting the ore from the
neighbouring mines; it was distant about two miles from any other
habitation. I can call to mind the whole landscape now: the tall pines
which rose up on the mountain above us, and the wide expanse of forest
beneath, on the topmost boughs and heads of whose trees we looked down
from our cottage, as the mountain below us rapidly descended into the
distant valley. In summer-time the prospect was beautiful: but during
the severe winter, a more desolate scene could not well be imagined.

"I said that, in the winter, my father occupied himself with the
chase; every day he left us, and often would he lock the door, that we
might not leave the cottage. He had no one to assist him, or to take
care of us---indeed, it was not easy to find a female servant who
would live in such a solitude; but could he have found one, my father
would nut have received her, for he had imbibed a horror of the sex,
as the difference of his conduct towards us, his two boys, and my poor
little sister, Marcella evidently proved. You may suppose we were
sadly neglected; indeed, we suffered much, for my father, fearful that
we might come to some harm, would not allow us fuel, when he left the
cottage; and we were obliged, therefore, to creep under the heaps of
bears' skins, and there to keep ourselves as warm as we could until he
returned in the evening, when a blazing fire was our delight. That my
father chose this restless sort of life may appear strange, but the
fact was, that he could not remain quiet; whether from the remorse for
having committed murder, or from the misery consequent on his change
of situation, or from both combined, he was never happy unless he was
in a state of activity. Children, however, when left much to
themselves, acquire a thoughtfulness not common to their age. So it
was with us; and during the short cold days of winter, we would sit
silent, longing for the happy hours when the snow would melt and the
leaves would burst out, and the birds begin their songs, and when we
should again be set at liberty.

"Such was our peculiar and savage sort of life until my brother Caesar
was nine, myself seven, and my sister five years old, when the
circumstances occurred on which is based the extraordinary narrative
which I am about to relate.

"One evening my father returned home rather later than usual; he had
been unsuccessful, and, as the weather was very severe, and many feet
of snow were upon the ground, he was not only very cold, but in a very
bad humour. He had brought in wood, and we were all three gladly
assisting each other in blowing on the embers to create the blaze,
when he caught poor little Marcella by the arm and threw her aside;
the child fell, struck her mouth, and bled very much. My brother ran
to raise her up. Accustomed to ill-usage and afraid of my father, she
did not dare to cry, but looked up in his face very piteously. My
father drew his stool nearer to the hearth, muttered something in
abuse of women, and busied himself with the fire, which both my
brother and I had deserted when our sister was so unkindly treated. A
cheerful blaze was soon the result of his exertions; but we did not,
as usual, crowd round it. Marcella, still bleeding, retired to a
corner, and my brother and I took our seats beside her, while my
father hung over the fire gloomily and alone. Such had been our
position for about half an hour, when the howl of a wolf, close under
the window of the cottage, fell on our ears. My father started up, and
seized his gun: the howl was repeated, he examined the priming, and
then hastily left the cottage, shutting the door after him. We all
waited (anxiously listening), for we thought that if he succeeded in
shooting the wolf, he would return in a better humour; and, although
he was harsh to all of us, and particularly so to our little sister,
still we loved our father, and loved to see him cheerful and happy,
for what else had we to look up to? And I may here observe, that
perhaps there never were three children who were fonder of each other;
we did not, like other children, fight and dispute together; and if,
by chance, any disagreement did arise between my elder brother and me,
little Marcella would run to us, and kissing us both, seal, through
her entreaties, the peace between us. Marcella was a lovely, amiable
child; I can recall her beautiful features even now---Alas! poor
little Marcella."

"She is dead, then?" observed Philip.

"Dead! yes, dead!---but how did she die?---But I must not anticipate,
Philip; let me tell my story.

"We waited for some time, but the report of the gun did not reach us,
and my elder brother then said, 'Our father has followed the wolf, and
will not be back for some time. Marcella, let us wash the blood from
your mouth, and then we will leave this corner, and go to the fire and
warm ourselves.'

"We did so, and remained there until near midnight, every minute
wondering, as it grew later, why our father did not return. We had no
idea that he was in any danger, but we thought that he must have
chased the wolf for a very long time. 'I will look out and see if
father is coming,' said my brother Caesar, going to the door. 'Take
care,' said Marcella, 'the wolves must be about now, and we cannot
kill them, brother.' My brother opened the door very cautiously, and
but a few inches: he peeped out.---'I see nothing,' said he, after a
time, and once more he joined us at the fire. 'We have had no supper,'
said I, for my father usually cooked the meat as soon as he came home;
and during his absence we had nothing but the fragments of the
preceding day.

"'And if our father comes home after his hunt, Caesar,' said Marcella,
'he will be pleased to have some supper; let us cook it for him and
for ourselves.' Caesar climbed upon the stool, and reached down some
meat---I forget now whether it was venison or bear's meat; but we cut
off the usual quantity, and proceeded to dress it, as we used to do
under our father's superintendence. We were all busy putting it into
the platters before the fire, to await his coming, when we heard the
sound of a horn. We listened---there was a noise outside, and a minute
afterwards my father entered, ushering in a young female, and a large
dark man in a hunter's dress.

"Perhaps I had better now relate what was only known to me many years
afterwards. When my father had left the cottage, he perceived a large
white wolf about thirty yards from him; as soon as the animal saw my
father, it retreated slowly, growling and snarling. My father
followed; the animal did not run, but always kept at some distance;
and my father did not like to fire until he was pretty certain that
his ball would take effect; thus they went on for some time, the wolf
now leaving my father far behind, and then stopping and snarling
defiance at him, and then, again, on his approach, setting off at
speed.

"Anxious to shoot the animal (for the white wolf is very rare) my
father continued the pursuit for several hours, during which he
continually ascended the mountain.

"You must know, Philip, that there are peculiar spots on those
mountains which are supposed, and, as my story will prove, truly
supposed, to be inhabited by the evil influences: they are well known
to the huntsmen, who invariably avoid them. Now, one of these spots,
an open space in the pine forests above us, had been pointed out to my
father as dangerous on that account. But, whether he disbelieved these
wild stories, or whether, in his eager pursuit of the chase, he
disregarded them, I know not; certain, however, it is, that he was
decoyed by the white wolf to this open space, when the animal appeared
to slacken her speed. My father approached, came close up to her,
raised his gun to his shoulder, and was about to fire, when the wolf
suddenly disappeared. He thought that the snow on the ground must have
dazzled his sight, and he let down his gun to look for the beast---but
she was gone; how she could have escaped over the clearance, without
his seeing her, was beyond his comprehension. Mortified at the ill
success of his chase, he was about to retrace his steps, when he heard
the distant sound of a horn. Astonishment at such a sound---at such an
hour---in such a wilderness, made him forget for the moment his
disappointment, and he remained riveted to the spot. In a minute the
horn was blown a second time, and at no great distance; my father
stood still, and listened: a third time it was blown. I forget the
term used to express it, but it was the signal which, my father well
knew, implied that the party was lost in the woods. In a few minutes
more my father beheld a man on horseback, with a female seated on the
crupper, enter the cleared space, and ride up to him. At first, my
father called to mind the strange stories which he had heard of the
supernatural beings who were said to frequent these mountains; but the
nearer approach of the parties satisfied him that they were mortals
like himself. As soon as they came up to him, the man who guided the
horse accosted him. 'Friend Hunter, you are out late, the better
fortune for us; we have ridden far, and are in fear of our lives which
are eagerly sought after. These mountains have enabled us to elude our
pursuers; but if we find not shelter and refreshment, that will avail
us little, as we must perish from hunger and the inclemency of the
night. My daughter, who rides behind me, is now more dead than
alive---say, can you assist us in our difficulty?'

"'My cottage is some few miles distant,' replied my father, 'but I
have little to offer you besides a shelter from the weather; to the
little I have you are welcome. May I ask whence you come?'

"'Yes, friend, it is no secret now; we have escaped from Transylvania,
where my daughter's honour and my life were equally in jeopardy!'

"This information was quite enough to raise an interest in my father's
heart, he remembered his own escape; he remembered the loss of his
wife's honour, and the tragedy by which it was wound up. He
immediately, and warmly, offered all the assistance which he could
afford them.

"'There is no time to be lost then, good sir,' observed the horseman;
'my daughter is chilled with the frost, and cannot hold out much
longer against the severity of the weather.'

"'Follow me,' replied my father, leading the way towards his home.

"'I was lured away in pursuit of a large white wolf,' observed my
father; 'it came to the very window of my hut, or I should not have
been out at this time of night.'

"'The creature passed by us just as we came out of the wood,' said the
female, in a silvery tone.

"'I was nearly discharging my piece at it,' observed the hunter; 'but
since it did us such good service, I am glad I allowed it to escape.'

"In about an hour and a half, during which my father walked at a rapid
pace, the party arrived at the cottage, and, as I said before, came
in.

"'We are in good time, apparently,' observed the dark hunter, catching
the smell of the roasted meat, as he walked to the fire and surveyed
my brother and sister, and myself. 'You have young cooks here,
Meinheer.' 'I am glad that we shall not have to wait,' replied my
father. 'Come, mistress, seat yourself by the fire; you require warmth
after your cold ride.' 'And where can I put up my horse, Meinheer?'
observed the huntsman. 'I will take care of him,' replied my father,
going out of the cottage door.

"The female must, however, be particularly described. She was young,
and apparently twenty years of age. She was dressed in a travelling-
dress, deeply bordered with white fur, and wore a cap of white ermine
on her head. Her features were very beautiful, at least I thought so,
and so my father has since declared. Her hair was flaxen, glossy, and
shining, and bright as a mirror; and her mouth, although somewhat
large when it was open, showed the most brilliant teeth I have ever
beheld. But there was something about her eyes, bright as they were,
which made us children afraid; they were so restless, so furtive; I
could not at that time tell why, but I felt as if there was cruelty in
her eye; and when she beckoned us to come to her, we approached her
with fear and trembling. Still she was beautiful, very beautiful. She
spoke kindly to my brother and myself, patted our heads and caressed
us; but Marcella would not come near her; on the contrary, she slunk
away, and hid herself in the bed, and would not wait for the supper,
which half an hour before she had been so anxious for.

"My father, having put the horse into a close shed, soon returned, and
supper was placed upon the table. When it was over, my father
requested that the young lady would take possession of his bed, and he
would remain at the fire, and sit up with her father. After some
hesitation on her part, this arrangement was agreed to, and I and my
brother crept into the other bed with Marcella, for we had as yet
always slept together.

"But we could not sleep; there was something so unusual, not only in
seeing strange people, but in having those people sleep at the
cottage, that we were bewildered. As for poor little Marcella, she was
quiet, but I perceived that she trembled during the whole night, and
sometimes I thought that she was checking a sob. My father had brought
out some spirits, which he rarely used, and he and the strange hunter
remained drinking and talking before the fire. Our ears were ready to
catch the slightest whisper---so much was our curiosity excited.

"'You said you came from Transylvania?' observed my father.

"'Even so, Meinheer,' replied the hunter. 'I was a serf to the noble
house of---; my master would insist upon my surrendering up my fair
girl to his wishes: it ended in my giving him a few inches of my
hunting-knife.'

"'We are countrymen, and brothers in misfortune,' replied my father,
taking the huntsman's hand, and pressing it warmly.

"'Indeed! Are you then from that country?'

"'Yes; and I too have fled for my life. But mine is a melancholy
tale.'

"'Your name?' inquired the hunter.

"'Krantz.'

"'What! Krantz of---? I have heard your tale; you need not renew your
grief by repeating it now. Welcome, most welcome, Meinheer, and, I may
say, my worthy kinsman. I am your second cousin, Wilfred of
Barnsdorf,' cried the hunter, rising up and embracing my father.

"They filled their horn-mugs to the brim, and drank to one another
after the German fashion. The conversation was then carried on in a
low tone; all that we could collect from it was that our new relative
and his daughter were to take up their abode in our cottage, at least
for the present. In about an hour they both fell back in their chairs
and appeared to sleep.

"'Marcella, dear, did you hear?' said my brother, in a low tone.

"'Yes,' replied Marcella in a whisper, 'I heard all. Oh! brother, I
cannot bear to look upon that woman---I feel so frightened.'

"My brother made no reply, and shortly afterwards we were all three
fast asleep.

"When we awoke the next morning, we found that the hunter's daughter
had risen before us. I thought she looked more beautiful than ever.
She came up to little Marcella and caressed her: the child burst into
tears, and sobbed as if her heart would break.

"But, not to detain you with too long a story, the huntsman and his
daughter were accommodated in the cottage. My father and he went out
hunting daily, leaving Christina with us. She performed all the
household duties; was very kind to us children; and, gradually, the
dislike even of little Marcella wore away. But a great change took
place in my father; he appeared to have conquered his aversion to the
sex, and was most attentive to Christina. Often, after her father and
we were in bed would he sit up with her, conversing in a low tone by
the fire. I ought to have mentioned that my father and the huntsman
Wilfred, slept in another portion of the cottage, and that the bed
which he formerly occupied, and which was in the same room as ours,
had been given up to the use of Christina. These visitors had been
about three weeks at the cottage, when, one night, after we children
had been sent to bed, a consultation was held. My father had asked
Christina in marriage, and had obtained both her own consent and that
of Wilfred; after this, a conversation took place, which was, as
nearly as I can recollect, as follows.

"'You may take my child, Meinheer Krantz, and my blessing with her,
and I shall then leave you and seek some other habitation---it matters
little where.'

"'Why not remain here, Wilfred?'

"'No, no, I am called elsewhere; let that suffice, and ask no more
questions. You have my child.'

"'I thank you for her, and will duly value her; but there is one
difficulty.'

"'I know what you would say; there is no priest here in this wild
country: true; neither is there any law to bind; still must some
ceremony pass between you, to satisfy a father. Will you consent to
marry her after my fashion? if so, I will marry you directly.'

"'I will,' replied my father.

"'Then take her by the hand. Now, Meinheer, swear.'

"'I swear,' repeated my father.

"'By all the spirits of the Hartz mountains--'

"'Nay, why not by Heaven?' interrupted my father.

"'Because it is not my humour,' rejoined Wilfred; 'if I prefer that
oath, less binding perhaps, than another, surely you will not thwart
me.'

"'Well be it so then; have your humour. Will you make me swear by that
in which I do not believe?'

"'Yet many do so, who in outward appearance are Christians,' rejoined
Wilfred; 'say, will you be married, or shall I take my daughter away
with me?'

"'Proceed,' replied my father, impatiently.

"'I swear by all the spirits of the Hartz mountains, by all their
power for good or for evil, that I take Christina for my wedded wife;
that I will ever protect her, cherish her, and love her; that my hand
shall never be raised against her to harm her.'

"My father repeated the words after Wilfred.

"'And if I fail in this my vow, may all the vengeance of the spirits
fall upon me and upon my children; may they perish by the vulture, by
the wolf, or other beasts of the forest; may their flesh be torn from
their limbs, and their bones blanch in the wilderness: all this I
swear.'

"My father hesitated, as he repeated the last words; little Marcella
could not restrain herself, and as my father repeated the last
sentence, she burst into tears. This sudden interruption appeared to
discompose the party, particularly my father; he spoke harshly to the
child, who controlled her sobs, burying her face under the bed-
clothes.

"Such was the second marriage of my father. The next morning, the
hunter Wilfred mounted his horse, and rode away.

"My father resumed his bed, which was in the same room as ours; and
things went on much as before the marriage, except that our new
mother-in-law did not show any kindness towards us; indeed during my
father's absence, she would often beat us, particularly little
Marcella, and her eyes would flash fire, as she looked eagerly upon
the fair and lovely child.

"One night, my sister awoke me and my brother.

"'What is the matter?' said Caesar.

"'She has gone out,' whispered Marcella.

"'Gone out!'

"'Yes, gone out at the door, in her night-clothes,' replied the child;
'I saw her get out of bed, look at my father to see if he slept, and
then she went out at the door.'

"What could induce her to leave her bed, and all undressed to go out,
in such bitter wintry weather, with the snow deep on the ground was to
us incomprehensible; we lay awake, and in about an hour we heard the
growl of a wolf, close under the window.

"'There is a wolf,' said Caesar. 'She will be torn to pieces.'

"'Oh no!' cried Marcella.

"In a few minutes afterwards our mother-in-law appeared; she was in
her night-dress, as Marcella had stated. She let down the latch of the
door, so as to make no noise, went to a pail of water, and washed her
face and hands, and then slipped into the bed where my father lay.

"We all three trembled---we hardly knew why; but we resolved to watch
the next night: we did so; and not only on the ensuing night, but on
many others, and always at about the same hour, would our mother-in-
law rise from her bed and leave the cottage; and after she was gone we
invariably heard the growl of a wolf under our window, and always saw
her, on her return, wash herself before she retired to bed. We
observed also that she seldom sat down to meals, and that when she did
she appeared to eat with dislike; but when the meat was taken down to
be prepared for dinner, she would often furtively put a raw piece into
her mouth.

"My brother Caesar was a courageous boy; he did not like to speak to
my father until he knew more. He resolved that he would follow her
out, and ascertain what she did. Marcella and I endeavoured to
dissuade him from this project; but he would not be controlled; and
the very next night he lay down in his clothes, and as soon as our
mother-in-law had left the cottage he jumped up, took down my father's
gun, and followed her.

"You may imagine in what a state of suspense Marcella and I remained
during his absence. After a few minutes we heard the report of a gun.
It did not awaken my father; and we lay trembling with anxiety. In a
minute afterwards we saw our mother-in-law enter the cottage---her
dress was bloody. I put my hand to Marcella's mouth to prevent her
crying out, although I was myself in great alarm. Our mother-in-law
approached my father's bed, looked to see if he was asleep, and then
went to the chimney and blew up the embers into a blaze.

"'Who is there?' said my father, waking up.

"'Lie still, dearest,' replied my mother-in-law; 'it is only me; I
have lighted the fire to warm some water; I am not quite well.'

"My father turned round, and was soon asleep; but we watched our
mother-in-law. She changed her linen, and threw the garments she had
worn into the fire; and we then perceived that her right leg was
bleeding profusely, as if from a gun-shot wound. She bandaged it up,
and then dressing herself, remained before the fire until the break of
day.

"Poor little Marcella, her heart beat quick as she pressed me to her
side---so indeed did mine. Where was our brother Caesar? How did my
mother-in-law receive the wound unless from his gun? At last my father
rose, and then for the first time I spoke, saying, 'Father, where is
my brother Caesar?'

"'Your brother!' exclaimed he; 'why, where can he be?'

"'Merciful Heaven! I thought, as lay very restless last night,'
observed our mother-in-law, 'that I heard somebody open the latch of
the door; and, dear me, husband, what has become of your gun?'

"My father cast his eyes up above the chimney, and perceived that his
gun was missing. For a moment he looked perplexed; then, seizing a
broad axe, he went out of the cottage without saying another word.

"He did not remain away from us long; in a few minutes he returned,
bearing in his arms the mangled body of my poor brother; he laid it
down, and covered up his face.

"My mother-in-law rose up, and looked at the body, while Marcella and
I threw ourselves by its side, wailing and sobbing bitterly.

"'Go to bed again, children,' said she, sharply. 'Husband,' continued
she, 'your boy must have taken the gun down, to shoot a wolf, and the
animal has been too powerful for him. Poor boy! he has paid dearly for
his rashness.'

"My father made no reply. I wished to speak---to tell all---but
Marcella who perceived my intention, held me by the arm, and looked at
me so imploringly, that I desisted.

"My father, therefore, was left in his error; but Marcella and I,
although we could not comprehend it, were conscious that our mother-
in-law was in some way connected with my brother's death.

"That day my father went out and dug a grave; and when he hid the body
in the earth, he piled up stones over it so that the wolves should not
be able to dig it up. The shock of this catastrophe was to my poor
father very severe; for several days he never went to the chase,
although at times he would utter bitter anathemas and vengeance
against the wolves.

"But during this time of mourning on his part, my mother-in-law's
nocturnal wanderings continued with the same regularity as before.

"At last my father took down his gun to repair to the forest; but he
soon returned, and appeared much annoyed.

"'Would you believe it, Christina, that the wolves---perdition to the
whole race---have actually contrived to dig up the body of my poor
boy, and now there is nothing left of him but his bones?'

"'Indeed!' replied my mother-in-law. Marcella looked at me; and I saw
in her intelligent eye all she would have uttered.

"'A wolf growls under our window every night, father,' said I.

"'Ay, indeed! Why did you not tell me, boy? Wake me the next time you
hear it.'

"I saw my mother-in-law turn away; her eyes flashed fire, and she
gnashed her teeth.

"My father went out again, and covered up with a larger pile of stones
the little remnants of my poor brother which the wolves had spared.
Such was the first act of the tragedy.

"The spring now came on; the snow disappeared, and we were permitted
to leave the cottage; but never would I quit for one moment my dear
little sister, to whom since the death of my brother, I was more
ardently attached than ever; indeed, I was afraid to leave her alone
with my mother-in-law, who appeared to have a particular pleasure in
ill-treating the child. My father was now employed upon his little
farm, and I was able to render him some assistance.

"Marcella used to sit by us while we were at work, leaving my mother-
in-law alone in the cottage. I ought to observe that, as the spring
advanced, so did my mother-in-law decrease her nocturnal rambles, and
that we never heard the growl of the wolf under the window after I had
spoken of it to my father.

"One day, when my father and I were in the field, Marcella being with
us, my mother-in-law came out, saying that she was going into the
forest to collect some herbs my father wanted, and that Marcella must
go to the cottage and watch the dinner. Marcella went; and my mother-
in-law soon disappeared in the forest, taking a direction quite
contrary to that in which the cottage stood, and leaving my father and
I, as it were, between her and Marcella.

"About an hour afterwards we were startled by shrieks from the
cottage---evidently the shrieks of little Marcella. 'Marcella has
burnt herself, father,' said I, throwing down my spade. My father
threw down his, and we both hastened to the cottage. Before we could
gain the door, out darted a large white wolf, which fled with the
utmost celerity. My father had no weapon; he rushed into the cottage,
and there saw poor little Marcella expiring. Her body was dreadfully
mangled, and the blood pouring from it had formed a large pool on the
cottage floor. My father's first intention had been to seize his gun
and pursue; but he was checked by this horrid spectacle; he knelt down
by his dying child, and burst into tears. Marcella could just look
kindly on us for a few seconds, and then her eyes were closed in
death.

"My father and I were still hanging over my poor sister's body, when
my mother-in-law came in. At the dreadful sight she expressed much
concern; but she did not appear to recoil from the sight of blood, as
most women do.

"'Poor child!' said she, 'it must have been that great white wolf
which passed me just now, and frightened me so. She's quite dead,
Krantz.'

"'I know it---I know it!' cried my father, in agony.

"I thought my father would never recover from the effects of this
second tragedy; he mourned bitterly over the body of his sweet child,
and for several days would not consign it to its grave, although
frequently requested by my mother-in-law to do so. At last he yielded,
and dug a grave for her close by that of my poor brother, and took
every precaution that the wolves should not violate her remains.

"I was now really miserable, as I lay alone in the bed which I had
formerly shared with my brother and sister. I could not help thinking
that my mother-in-law was implicated in both their deaths, although I
could not account for the manner; but I no longer felt afraid of her;
my little heart was full of hatred and revenge.

"The night after my sister had been buried, as I lay awake, I
perceived my mother-in-law get up and go out of the cottage. I waited
some time, then dressed myself, and looked out through the door, which
I half opened. The moon shone bright and I could see the spot where my
brother and my sister had been buried; and what was my horror when I
perceived my mother-in-law busily removing the stones from Marcella's
grave!

"She was in her white night-dress and the moon shone full upon her.
She was digging with her hands, and throwing away the stones behind
her with all the ferocity of a wild beast. It was some time before I
could collect my senses, and decide what I should do. At last I
perceived that she had arrived at the body, and raised it up to the
side of the grave. I could bear it no longer, I ran to my father and
awoke him.

"'Father, father!' cried I, 'dress yourself, and get your gun.'

"'What!' cried my father, 'the wolves are there, are they?'

"He jumped out of bed, threw on his clothes, and, in his anxiety, did
not appear to perceive the absence of his wife. As soon as he was
ready I opened the door; he went out, and I followed him.

"Imagine his horror, when (unprepared as he was for such a sight) he
beheld, as he advanced towards the grave not a wolf, but his wife, in
her night-dress, on her hands and knees, crouching by the body of my
sister, and tearing off large pieces of the flesh, and devouring them
with all the avidity of a wolf. She was too busy to be aware of our
approach. My father dropped his gun; his hair stood on end, so did
mine; he breathed heavily, and then his breath for a time stopped. I
picked up the gun and put it into his hand. Suddenly he appeared as if
concentrated rage had restored him to double vigour; he levelled his
piece, fired, and with a loud shriek down fell the wretch whom he had
fostered in his bosom.

"'God of Heaven!' cried my father, sinking down upon the earth in a
swoon, as soon as he had discharged his gun.

"I remained some time by his side before he recovered. 'Where am I?'
said he, 'what has happened? Oh!---yes, yes! I recollect now. Heaven
forgive me!'

"He rose and we walked up to the grave; what again was our
astonishment and horror to find that, instead of the dead body of my
mother-in-law, as we expected, there was lying over the remains of my
poor sister, a large white she-wolf.

"'The white wolf!' exclaimed my father, 'the white wolf which decoyed
me into the forest---I see it all now---I have dealt with the spirits
of the Hartz Mountains.'

"For some time my father remained in silence and deep thought. He then
carefully lifted up the body of my sister, replaced it in the grave,
an covered it over as before, having struck the head of the dead
animal with the heel of his boot, and raving like a madman. He walked
back to the cottage, shut the door, and threw himself on the bed; I
did the same, for I was in a stupor of amazement.

"Early in the morning we were both roused by a loud knocking at the
door, and in rushed the hunter Wilfred.

"'My daughter---man---my daughter!---where is my daughter?' cried he
in a rage.

"'Where the wretch, the fiend, should be, I trust,' replied my father,
starting up, and displaying equal choler; 'where she should be---in
hell! Leave this cottage, or you may fare worse.'

"'Ha---ha!' replied the hunter, 'would you harm a potent spirit of the
Hartz Mountains. Poor mortal, who must needs wed a werewolf.'

"'Out, demon! I defy thee and thy power.'

"'Yet shall you feel it; remember your oath---your solemn oath---never
to raise your hand against her to harm her.'

"'I made no compact with evil spirits.'

"'You did, and if you failed in your vow, you were to meet the
vengeance of the spirits. Your children were to perish by the vulture,
the wolf--'

"'Out, out, demon!'

"'And their bones blanch in the wilderness. Ha!---ha!'

"My father, frantic with rage, seized his axe, and raised it over
Wilfred's head to strike.

"'All this I swear,' continued the huntsman, mockingly.

"The axe descended; but it passed through the form of the hunter, and
my father lost his balance, and tell heavily on the floor.

"'Mortal!' said the hunter, striding over my father's body, 'we have
power over those only who have committed murder. You have been guilty
of a double murder: you shall pay the penalty attached to your
marriage vow. Two of your children are gone, the third is yet to
follow---and follow them he will, for your oath is registered. Go---it
were kindness to kill thee---your punishment is, that you live!'

"With these words the spirit disappeared. My father rose from the
floor, embraced me tenderly, and knelt down in prayer.

"The next morning he quitted the cottage for ever. He took me with
him, and bent his steps to Holland, where we safely arrived. He had
some little money with him; but he had not been many days in Amsterdam
before he was seized with a brain fever, and died raving mad. I was
put into the asylum, and afterwards was sent to sea before the mast.
You now know all my history. The question is, whether I am to pay the
penalty of my father's oath? I am myself perfectly convinced that, in
some way or another, I shall."

On the twenty-second day the high land of the south of Sumatra was in
view: as there were no vessels in sight, they resolved to keep their
course through the Straits, and run for Pulo Penang, which they
expected, as their vessel lay so close to the wind, to reach in seven
or eight days. By constant exposure Philip and Krantz were now so
bronzed that with their long beards and Mussulman dresses, they might
easily have passed off for natives. They had steered the whole of the
days exposed to a burning sun; they had lain down and slept in the dew
of the night; but their health had not suffered. But for several days,
since he had confided the history of his family to Philip, Krantz had
become silent and melancholy: his usual flow of spirits had vanished
and Philip had often questioned him as to the cause. As they entered
the Straits, Philip talked of what they should do upon their arrival
at Goa; when Krantz gravely replied, "For some days, Philip, I have
had a presentiment that I shall never see that city."

"You are out of health, Krantz," replied Philip.

"No, I am in sound health, body and mind. I have endeavoured to shake
off the presentiment, but in vain; there is a warning voice that
continually tells me that I shall not be long with you. Philip, will
you oblige me by making me content on one point? I have gold about my
person which may be useful to you; oblige me by taking it, and
securing it on your own."

"What nonsense, Krantz."

"It is no nonsense, Philip. Have you not had your warnings? Why should
I not have mine? You know that I have little fear in my composition,
and that I care not about death; but I feel the presentiment which I
speak of more strongly every hour. It is some kind spirit who would
warn me to prepare for another world. Be it so. I have lived long
enough in this world to leave it without regret; although to part with
you and Amine, the only two now dear to me, is painful, I
acknowledge."

"May not this arise from over-exertion and fatigue, Krantz? Consider
how much excitement you have laboured under within these last four
months. Is not that enough to create a corresponding depression?
Depend upon it, my dear friend, such is the fact."

"I wish it were; but I feel otherwise, and there is a feeling of
gladness connected with the idea that I am to leave this world,
arising from another presentiment, which equally occupies my mind."

"I hardly can tell you---but Amine and you are connected with it. In
my dreams I have seen you meet again; but it has appeared to me as if
a portion of your trial was purposely shut from my sight in dark
clouds; and I have asked, 'May not I see what is there concealed?'---
and an invisible has answered, 'No! 'twould make you wretched. Before
these trials take place, you will be summoned away:' and then I have
thanked Heaven, and felt resigned."

"These are the imaginings of a disturbed brain, Krantz; that I am
destined to suffering may be true; but why Amine should suffer, or why
you, young, in full health and vigour should not pass your days in
peace, and live to a good old age, there is no cause for believing.
You will be better tomorrow."

"Perhaps so," replied Krantz; "but still you must yield to my whim,
and take the gold. If I am wrong, and we do arrive safe, you know,
Philip, you can let me have it back," observed Krantz, with a faint
smile---"but you forget, our water is nearly out, and we must look out
for a rill on the coast to obtain a fresh supply."

"I was thinking of that when you commenced this unwelcome topic. We
had better look out for the water before dark, and as soon as we have
replenished our jars, we will make sail again."

At the time that this conversation took place, they were on the
eastern side of the strait, about forty miles to the northward. The
interior of the coast was rocky and mountainous; but it slowly
descended to low land of alternate forest and jungles, which continued
to the beach: the country appeared to be uninhabited. Keeping close in
to the shore, they discovered, after two hours' run, a fresh stream
which burst in a cascade from the mountains, and swept its devious
course through the jungle, until it poured its tribute into the waters
of the strait.

They ran close in to the mouth of the stream, lowered the sails, and
pulled the peroqua against the current, until they had advanced far
enough to assure them that the water was quite fresh. The jars were
soon filled, and they were again thinking of pushing off; when,
enticed by the beauty of the spot, the coolness of the fresh water,
and wearied with their long confinement on board of the peroqua, they
proposed to bathe---a luxury hardly to be appreciated by those who
have not been in a similar situation. They threw off their Mussulman
dresses, and plunged into the stream, where they remained fur some
time. Krantz was the first to get out: he complained of feeling
chilled, and he walked on to the banks where their clothes had been
laid. Philip also approached nearer to the beach, intending to follow
him.

"And now, Philip," said Krantz, "this will be a good opportunity for
me to give you the money. I will open my sash and pour it out, and you
can put it into your own before you put it on."

Philip was standing in the water, which was about level with his
waist.

"Well, Krantz," said he, "I suppose if it must be so, it must---but it
appears to me an idea so ridiculous---however, you shall have your own
way."

Philip quitted the run, and sat down by Krantz, who was already busy
in shaking the doubloons out of the folds of his sash---at last he
said--

"I believe, Philip, you have got them all now?---I feel satisfied."

"What danger there can be to you, which I am not equally exposed to, I
cannot conceive," replied Philip; "however--"

Hardly had he said these words, when there was a tremendous roar---a
rush like a mighty wind through the air---a blow which threw him on
his back---a loud cry---and a contention. Philip recovered himself,
and perceived the naked form of Krantz carried off with the speed of
an arrow by an enormous tiger through the jungle. He watched with
distended eyeballs; in a few seconds the animal and Krantz had
disappeared!

"God of Heaven! would that thou hadst spared me this," cried Philip,
throwing himself down in agony on his face. "Oh! Krantz, my friend---
my brother---too sure was your presentiment. Merciful God! have
pity---but thy will be done;" and Philip burst into a flood of tears.

For more than an hour did he remain fixed upon the spot, careless and
indifferent to the danger by which he was surrounded. At last,
somewhat recovered, he rose, dressed himself, and then again sat
down---his eyes fixed upon the clothes of Krantz, and the gold which
still lay on the sand.

"He would give me that gold. He foretold his doom. Yes! yes! it was
his destiny, and it has been fulfilled. His bones will bleach in the
wilderness, and the spirit-hunter and his wolfish daughter are
avenged."

The shades of evening now set in, and the low growling of the beasts
of the forest recalled Philip to a sense of his own danger. He thought
of Amine; and hastily making the clothes of Krantz and the doubloons
into a package, he stepped into the peroqua, with difficulty shoved it
off, and with a melancholy heart, and in silence, hoisted the sail,
and pursued his course.

"Yes, Amine," thought Philip, as he watched the stars twinkling and
coruscating; "yes, you are right, when you assert that the destinies
of men are foreknown, and may by some be read. My destiny is, alas!
that I should be severed from all I value upon earth, and die
friendless and alone. Then welcome death, if such is to be the case;
welcome---a thousand welcomes! what a relief wilt thou be to me! what
joy to find myself summoned to where the weary are at rest! I have my
task to fulfil. God grant that it may soon be accomplished, and let
not my life be embittered by any more trials such as this."

Again did Philip weep, for Krantz had been his long-tried, valued
friend, his partner in all his dangers and privations, from the period
that they had met when the Dutch fleet attempted the passage round
Cape Horn.

After seven days of painful watching and brooding over bitter
thoughts, Philip arrived at Pulo Penang, where he found a vessel about
to sail for the city to which he was destined. He ran his peroqua
alongside of her, and found that she was a brig under the Portuguese
flag, having, however, but two Portuguese on board, the rest of the
crew being natives. Representing himself as am Englishman in the
Portuguese service, who had been wrecked, and offering to pay for his
passage, he was willingly received, and in a few days the vessel
sailed.

Their voyage was prosperous; in six weeks they anchored in the roads
of Goa; the next day they went up the river. The Portuguese captain
informed Philip where he might obtain lodging; and passing him off as
one of his crew, there was no difficulty raised as to his landing.
Having located himself at his new lodging, Philip commenced some
inquiries of his host relative to Amine, designating her merely as a
young woman who had arrived there in a vessel some weeks before, but
he could obtain no information concerning her. "Signor," said the
host, "to-morrow is the grand auto-da-fe; we can do nothing until that
is over; afterwards, I will put you in the way to find out what you
wish. In the mean time, you can walk about the town; to-morrow I will
take you to where you can behold the grand procession, and then we
will try what we can do to assist you in your search."

Philip went out, procured a suit of clothes, removed his beard, and
then walked about the town, looking up at every window to see if he
could perceive Amine. At a corner of one of the streets, he thought he
recognised Father Mathias, and ran up to him; but the monk had drawn
his cowl over his head, and when addressed by that name, made no
reply.

"I was deceived," thought Philip; "but I really thought it was him."
And Philip was right; it was Father Mathias, who thus screened himself
from Philip's recognition.

Tired, at last he returned to his hotel, just before it was dark. The
company there were numerous; everybody for miles distant had come to
Goa to witness the auto-da-fe,---and everybody was discussing the
ceremony.

"I will see this grand procession," said Philip to himself, as he
threw himself on his bed. "It will drive thought from me for a time;
and God knows how painful my thoughts have now become. Amine, dear
Amine, may angels guard thee!"




THE LEGEND OF THE BELL ROCK.

There was a grand procession through the streets of the two towns of
Perth and Dundee. The holy abbots, in their robes, walked under gilded
canopies, the monks chanted, the censers were thrown, flags and
banners were carried by seamen, lighted tapers by penitents; St.
Antonio, the patron of those who trust to the stormy ocean, was
carried in all pomp through the streets; and, as the procession
passed, coins of various value were thrown down by those who watched
it from the windows, and, as fast as thrown were collected by little
boys dressed as angels, and holding silver vessels to receive the
largesses. During the whole day did the procession continue, and large
was the treasure collected in the two towns. Every one gave freely,
for there were few, indeed none, who, if not in their own circle, at
least among their acquaintances, had to deplore the loss of some one
dear to them, or to those they visited, from the dangerous rock which
lay in the very track of all the vessels entering the Firth of Tay.

These processions had been arranged, that a sufficient sum of money
might be collected to enable them to put in execution a plan proposed
by an adventurous and bold young seaman, in a council held for the
purpose, of fixing a bell on the rock, which could be so arranged that
the slightest breath of wind would cause the hammer of it to sound,
and thus, by its tolling, warn the mariner of his danger; and the sums
given were more than sufficient. A meeting was then held, and it was
unanimously agreed that Andrew M'Clise should be charged with the
commission to go over to Amsterdam, and purchase the bell of a
merchant residing there, whom Andrew stated to have one in his
possession, which, from its fine tone and size, was exactly calculated
for the purport to which it was to be appropriated.

Andrew M'Clise embarked with the money, and made a prosperous voyage.
He had often been at Amsterdam, and had lived with the merchant, whose
name was Vandermaclin; and the attention to his affairs, the dexterity
and the rapidity of the movements of Andrew M'Clise, had often
elicited the warmest encomiums of Mynheer Vandermaclin; and many
evenings had Andrew M'Clise passed with him, drinking in moderation
their favourite scheedam, and indulging in the meditative merschaum.
Vandermaclin had often wished that he had a son like Andrew M'Clise,
to whom he could leave his property, with the full assurance that the
heap would not be scattered, but greatly added to.

Vandermaclin was a widower. He had but one daughter, who was now just
arrived at an age to return from the pension to her father's house,
and take upon herself the domestic duties. M'Clise had never yet seen
the beautiful Katerina.

"And so, Mynheer M'Clise," said Vandermaclin, who was sitting in the
warehouse on the ground-floor of his tenement, "you come to purchase
the famous bell of Utrecht; with the intention of fixing it upon that
rock, the danger of which we have so often talked over after the work
of the day has been done? I, too, have suffered from that same rock,
as you well know; but still I have been fortunate. The price will be
heavy; and so it ought to be, for the bell itself is of no small
weight."

"We are prepared to pay it, Mynheer Vandermaclin."

"Nevertheless, in so good a cause, and for so good a purport, you
shall not be overcharged. I will say nothing of the beauty of the
workmanship, or even of the mere manufacture. You shall pay but its
value in metal; the same price which the Jew Isaacs offered me for it
but four months ago. I will not ask what a Jew would ask, but what a
Jew would give, which makes no small difference. Have you ten thousand
guilders?"

"I have, and more."

"That is my price, Mynheer M'Clise, and I wish for no more; for I,
too, will contribute my share to the good work. Are you content, and
is it a bargain?"

"It is; and the holy abbots will thank you on vellum, Mynheer
Vandermaclin, for your generosity."

"I prefer the thanks of the bold seamen to those of the idle
churchmen; but, never mind, it is a bargain. Now, we will go in; it is
time to close the doors. We will take our pipes, and you shall make
the acquaintance of my fair daughter, Katerina."

At the time we are speaking of, M'Clise was about six-and-twenty years
of age; he was above the middle size, elegant in person, and with a
frankness and almost nobility in his countenance, which won all who
saw him.

His manners were like those of most seamen, bold, but not offensively
so. His eye was piercing as an eagle's; and it seemed as if his very
soul spoke from it. At the very first meeting between him and the
daughter of Vandermaclin, it appeared to both as if their destinies
were to unite them.

They loved not as others love, but with an intensity which it would be
impossible to portray; but they hardly exchanged a word. Again and
again they met; their eyes spoke, but nothing more. The bell was put
on board the vessel, the money had been paid down, and M'Clise could
no longer delay. He felt as if his heart-strings were severed as he
tore himself away from the land where all remained that he coveted
upon earth. And Katerina, she too felt as if her existence was a
blank; and as the vessel sailed from the port, she breathed short; and
when not even her white and lofty topgallant sail could be discovered
as a speck, she threw herself on her couch and wept. And M'Clise as he
sailed away, remained for hours leaning his cheek on his hand,
thinking of, over and over again, every lineament and feature of the
peerless Katerina.

Two months passed away, during which M'Clise was busied every ebb of
the tide in superintending the work on the rock. At last, all was
ready; and once more was to be beheld a gay procession; but this time
it was on the water. It was on a calm and lovely summer's morn, that
the abbots and the monks, attended by a large company of the
authorities, and others, who were so much interested in the work in
hand, started from the shore of Aberbrothwick in a long line of boats,
decorated with sacred and with other various banners and devices. The
music floated along the water, and the solemn chants of the monks were
for once heard where never yet they had been heard before, or ever
will again. M'Clise was at the rock, in a small vessel purposely
constructed to carry the bell, and with sheers to hang it on the
supports imbedded in the solid rock. The bell was in its place, and
the abbot blessed the bell; and holy water was sprinkled on the metal,
which was for the future to be lashed by the waves of the salt sea.
And the music and the chants were renewed; and as they continued, the
wind gradually rose, and with the rising of the wind the bell tolled
loud and deep. The tolling of the bell was the signal for return, for
it was a warning that the weather was about to change, and the
procession pulled back to Aberbrothwick, and landed in good time; for
in one hour more, and the rocky coast was again lashed by the waves,
and the bell tolled loud and quick, although there were none there but
the sea-gull, who screamed with fright as he wheeled in the air at
this unusual noise upon the rock, which, at the ebb he had so often
made his resting-place.

M'Clise had done his work; the bell was fixed; and once more he
hastened with his vessel to Amsterdam. Once more was he an inmate of
Vandermaclin's house; once more in the presence of the idol of his
soul. This time they spoke; this time their vows were exchanged for
life and death. But Vandermaclin saw not the state of their hearts. He
looked upon the young seamen as too low, too poor, to be a match for
his daughter; and as such an idea never entered his head, so did he
never imagine that he would have dared to love. But he was soon
undeceived; for M'Clise frankly stated his attachment, and demanded
the hand of Katerina; and, at the demand, Vandermaclin's face was
flushed with anger.

"Mynheer M'Clise," said he, after a pause, as if to control his
feelings; "when a man marries, he is bound to show that he has
wherewithal to support his wife; to support her in that rank, and to
afford her those luxuries to which she has been accustomed in her
father's house. Show me that you can do so, and I will not refuse you
the hand of Katerina."

"As yet, I have not," replied M'Clise; "but I am young and can work; I
have money, and will gain more. Tell me what sum do you think that I
should possess to warrant my demanding the hand of your daughter?"

"Produce twelve thousand guilders, and she is yours," replied the
merchant.

"I have but three thousand," replied M'Clise.

"Then, think no more of Katerina. It is a foolish passion, and you
must forget it. And, Mynheer M'Clise, I must not have my daughter's
affections tampered with. She must forget you; and that can only be
effected by your not meeting again. I wish you well, Mynheer M'Clise,
but I must request your absence."

M'Clise departed from the presence of the merchant, bowed down with
grief and disappointment. He contrived that a letter, containing the
result of his application, should be put in the hands of Katerina. But
Vandermaclin was informed of this breach of observance, and Katerina
was sent to a convent, there to remain until the departure of her
lover; and Vandermaclin wrote to his correspondent at Dundee,
requesting that the goods forwarded to him might not be sent by the
vessel commanded by M'Clise.

Of this our young captain received information. All hope was nearly
gone; still he lingered, and delayed his departure. He was no longer
the active, energetic seaman; he neglected all, even his attire.

M'Clise knew in which convent his fair Katerina had been immured; and
often would he walk round its precincts, with the hope of seeing her,
if it were but for a moment, but in vain. His vessel was now laden,
and he could delay no longer. He was to sail the next morning; and
once more did the unhappy young man take his usual walk to look at
those walls which contained all that was dear to him on earth. His
reverie was broken by a stone falling down to his feet; he took it up;
there was a small piece of paper attached to it with a silken thread.
He opened it; it was the handwriting of Katerina, and contained but
two words---"The Bell."

The bell! M'Clise started; for he immediately comprehended what was
meant. The whole plan came like electricity through his brain. Yes;
then there was a promise of happiness. The bell was worth ten thousand
guilders; that sum had been offered, and would now be given by Isaacs
the Jew. He would be happy with his Katerina; and he blessed her
ingenuity for devising the means. For a minute or two he was
transported; but the re-action soon took place. What was he about to
attempt? sacrilege---cruelty. The bell had been blessed by the holy
church; it had been purchased by holy and devout alms. It had been
placed on the rock to save the lives of his brother seamen; and were
he to remove it, would he not be responsible for all the lives lost?
Would not the wail of the widow, and the tears of the orphan, be
crying out to Heaven against him? No, no! never! The crime was too
horrible; and M'Clise stamped upon the paper, thinking he was tempted
by Satan in the shape of woman; but when woman tempts, man is lost. He
recalled the charms of Katerina; all his repugnance was overcome; and
he resolved that the deed should be accomplished, and that Katerina
should be gained, even if he lost his soul.

Andrew M'Clise sailed away from Amsterdam, and Katerina recovered her
liberty. Vandermaclin was anxious that she should marry: and many were
the suitors for her hand, but in vain. She reminded her father, that
he had pledged himself, if M'Clise counted down twelve thousand
guilders, that she should be his wife; and to that pledge she insisted
that he was bound fast. And Vandermaclin after reasoning with her, and
pointing out to her that twelve thousand guilders was a sum so large,
that M'Clise might not procure until his old age, even if he were
fortunate, acknowledged that such was his promise, and that he would,
like an honest man, abide by it, provided that M'Clise should fulfil
his part of the agreement in the space of two years; after which he
should delay her settlement no longer. And Katerina raised her eyes to
heaven, and whispered, as she clasped her hands, "The Bell." Alas!
that we should invoke Heaven when we would wish to do wrong: but
mortals are blind, and none so blind as those who are impelled by
passion.

It was in the summer of that year that M'Clise had made his
arrangements: having procured the assistance of some lawless hands, he
had taken the advantage of a smooth and glassy sea and a high tide to
remove the bell on board his own vessel; a work of little difficulty
to him, as he had placed it there, and knew well the fastenings. He
sailed away for Amsterdam, and was permitted by Heaven to arrive safe
with his sacrilegious freight. He did not, as before, enter the canal
opposite to the house of Vandermaclin, but one that ran behind the
habitation of the Jew Isaacs. At night, he went into the house, and
reported to the Jew what he had for sale; and the keen grey eyes of
the bent-double little Israelite sparkled with delight, for he knew
that his profit would be great. At midnight the bell was made fast to
the crane, and safely deposited in the warehouse of the Jew, who
counted out the ten thousand guilders to the enraptured M'Clise, whose
thoughts were wholly upon the possession of his Katerina, and not upon
the crime he had committed.

But, alas! to conceal one crime, we are too often obliged to be guilty
of even deeper; and thus it was with Andrew M'Clise. The people who
had assisted, upon the promise of a thousand guilders being divided
among them, now murmured at their share, and insisted upon an equal
division of the spoils, or threatened with an immediate confession of
the black deed.

M'Clise raved, and cursed, and tore his hair; promised to give them
the money as soon as he had wedded Katerina; but they would not
consent. Again the devil came to his assistance, and whispered how he
was to act: he consented. The next night the division was to be made.
They met in his cabin; he gave them wine, and they drank plentifully;
but the wine was poisoned, and they all died before the morning.
M'Clise tied weights to their bodies, and sunk them in the deep canal;
broke open his hatches, to make it appear that his vessel had been
plundered; and then went to the authorities denouncing his crew as
having plundered him, and escaped. Immediate search was made, but they
were not to be found; and it was supposed that they had escaped in a
boat.

Once more M'Clise, whose conscience was seared, went to the house of
Vandermaclin, counted down his twelve thousand guilders, and claimed
his bride; and Vandermaclin, who felt that his daughter's happiness
was at stake, now gave his consent. As M'Clise stated that he was
anxious to return to England, and arrange with the merchants whose
goods had been plundered, in a few days the marriage took place; and
Katerina clasped the murderer in her arms. All was apparent joy and
revelry; but there was anguish in the heart of M'Clise, who, now that
he had gained his object, felt that it had cost him much too dear, for
his peace of mind was gone for ever. But Katerina cared not; every
spark of feeling was absorbed in her passion, and the very guilt of
M'Clise but rendered him more dear; for was it not for her that he had
done all this? M'Clise received her portion, and hasted to sail away;
for the bodies were still in the canal, and he trembled every hour
lest his crime should be discovered. And Vandermaclin bade farewell to
his daughter: and, he knew not why, but there was a feeling he could
not suppress, that they never should meet again.

"Down---down below, Katerina! this is no place for you," cried
M'Clise, as he stood at the helm of the vessel. "Down, dearest, down,
or you will be washed overboard. Every sea threatens to pour into our
decks; already have we lost two men. Down, Katerina! down, I tell
you."

"I fear not; let me remain with you."

"I tell you, down!" cried M'Clise, in wrath; and Katerina cast upon
him a reproachful look, and obeyed.

The storm was at its height; the sun had set, black and monstrous
billows chased each other, and the dismasted vessel was hurried on
towards the land. The wind howled, and whistled sharply at each chink
in the bulwarks of the vessel. For three days had they fought the
gale, but in vain. Now, if it continued, all chance was over; for the
shore was on their lee, distant not many miles. Nothing could save
them, but gaining the mouth of the Firth of Tay, and then they could
bear up for Dundee. And there was a boiling surge, and a dark night,
and roaring seas, and their masts were floating far away; and M'Clise
stood at the helm, keeping her broadside to the sea: his heart was
full of bitterness, and his guilty conscience bore him down, and he
looked for death, and he dreaded it; for was he not a sacrilegious
murderer, and was there not an avenging God above?

Once more Katerina appeared on deck, clinging for support to Andrew.

"I cannot stay below. Tell me, will it soon be over?"

"Yes," replied M'Clise, gloomily; "it will soon be over with all of
us."

"How mean you? you told me there was no danger."

"I told you falsely; there is death soon, and damnation afterwards;
for you I have lost my soul!"

"Oh! say not so."

"I say it. Leave me, leave me, woman, or I curse thee."

"Curse me, Andrew? Oh, no! Kiss me, Andrew; and if we are to perish,
let us expire in each other's arms."

"'Tis as well; you have dragged me to perdition. Leave me, I say, for
you have my bitter curse."

Thus was his guilty love turned to hate, now that death was staring
him in the face.

Katerina made no reply. She threw herself on the deck, and abandoned
herself to her feeling of bitter anguish. And as she lay there, and
M'Clise stood at the helm, the wind abated; the vessel was no longer
borne down as before, although the waves were still mountains high.
The seamen on board rallied; some fragments of sail were set on the
remnants of the masts, and there was a chance of safety. M'Clise spoke
not, but watched the helm. The wind shifted in their favour; and hope
rose in every heart. The Firth of Tay was now open, and they were
saved! Light was the heart of M'Clise when he kept away the vessel,
and gave the helm up to the mate. He hastened to Katerina, who still
remained on the deck, raised her up, whispered comfort and returning
love; but she heard not---she could not forget---and she wept
bitterly.

"We are saved, dear Katerina!"

"Better that we had been lost!" replied she, mournfully.

"No, no! say not so, with your own Andrew pressing you to his bosom."

"Your bitter curse!"

"'Twas madness---nothing---I knew not what I said." But the iron had
entered into her soul. Her heart was broken.

"You had better give orders for them to look out for the Bell Rock,"
observed the man at the helm to M'Clise.

The Bell Rock! M'Clise shuddered, and made no reply. Onward went the
vessel, impelled by the sea and wind: one moment raised aloft, and
towering over the surge; at another, deep in the hollow trough, and
walled in by the convulsed element. M'Clise still held his Katerina in
his arms, who responded not to his endearments, when a sudden shock
threw them on the deck. The crashing of the timbers, the pouring of
the waves over the stern, the heeling and settling of the vessel, were
but the work of a few seconds. One more furious shock,---she
separates, falls on her beam ends, and the raging seas sweep over her.

M'Clise threw from him her whom he had so madly loved, and plunged
into the wave. Katerina shrieked, as she dashed after him, and all was
over.

When the storm rises, and the screaming sea-gull seeks the land, and
the fisherman hasten his bark towards the beach, there is to be seen,
descending from the dark clouds with the rapidity of lightning, the
form of Andrew M'Clise, the heavy bell to which he is attached by the
neck, bearing him down to his doom.

And when all is smooth and calm, when at the ebbing tide, the wave but
gently kisses the rock, then by the light of the silver moon, the
occupants of the vessels which sail from the Firth of Tay, have often
beheld the form of the beautiful Katerina, waving her white scarf as a
signal that they should approach, and take her off from the rock on
which she is seated. At times, she offers a letter for her father,
Vandermaclin; and she mourns and weeps as the wary mariners, with
their eyes fixed on her, and with folded arms, pursue their course in
silence and in dread.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


