

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The Devil of the Marsh
Author: Henry Brereton Marriott Watson
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0602421.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: July 2006
Date most recently updated: July 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


THE DEVIL OF THE MARSH
Henry Brereton Marriott Watson



It was nigh upon dusk when I drew close to the Great Marsh, and
already the white vapours were about, riding across the sunken levels
like ghosts in a churchyard. Though I had set forth in a mood of wild
delight, I had sobered in the lonely ride across the moor and was now
uneasily alert. As my horse jerked down the grassy slopes that fell
away to the jaws of the swamp I could see thin streams of mist rise
slowly, hover like wraiths above the long rushes, and then, turning
gradually more material, go blowing heavily away across the flat. The
appearance of the place at this desolate hour, so remote from human
society and so darkly significant of evil presences, struck me with a
certain wonder that she should have chosen this spot for our meeting.
She was a familiar of the moors, where I had invariably encountered
her; but it was like her arrogant caprice to test my devotion by some
such dreary assignation. The wide and horrid prospect depressed me
beyond reason, but the fact of her neighbourhood drew me on, and my
spirits mounted at the thought that at last she was to put me in
possession of herself. Tethering my horse upon the verge of the swamp,
I soon discovered the path that crossed it, and entering struck out
boldly for the heart. The track could have been little used, for the
reeds, which stood high above the level of my eyes upon either side,
straggled everywhere across in low arches, through which I dodged, and
broke my way with some inconvenience and much impatience. A full half
hour I was solitary in that wilderness, and when at last a sound other
than my own footsteps broke the silence the dusk had fallen.

  I was moving very slowly at the time, with a mind half disposed to
turn from the melancholy expedition, which it seemed to me now must
surely be a cruel jest she had played upon me. While some such
reluctance held me, I was suddenly arrested by a hoarse croaking which
broke out upon my left, sounding somewhere from the reeds in the black
mire. A little further it came again from close at hand, and when I
had passed on a few more steps in wonder and perplexity, I heard it
for the third time. I stopped and listened, but the marsh was as a
grave, and so taking the noise for the signal of some raucous frog, I
resumed my way. But in a little the croaking was repeated, and coming
quickly to a stand I pushed the reeds aside and peered into the
darkness. I could see nothing, but at the immediate moment of my pause
I thought I detected the sound of some body trailing through the
rushes. My distaste for the adventure grew with this suspicion, and
had it not been for my delirious infatuation I had assuredly turned
back and ridden home. The ghastly sound pursued me at intervals along
the track, until at last, irritated beyond endurance by the sense of
this persistent and invisible company, I broke into a sort of run.
This, it seemed, the creature (whatever it was) could not achieve, for
I heard no more of it, and continued my way in peace. My path at
length ran out from among the reeds upon the smooth flat of which she
had spoken, and here my heart quickened, and the gloom of the dreadful
place lifted. The flat lay in the very centre of the marsh, and here
and there in it a gaunt bush or withered tree rose like a spectre
against the white mists. At the further end I fancied some kind of
building loomed up; but the fog which had been gathering ever since my
entrance upon the passage sailed down upon me at that moment and the
prospect went out with suddenness. As I stood waiting for the clouds
to pass, a voice cried to me out of its centre, and I saw her next
second with bands of mist swirling about her body, come rushing to me
from the darkness. She put her long arms about me, and, drawing her
close, I looked into her deep eyes. Far down in them, it seemed to me,
I could discern a mystic laughter dancing in the wells of light, and I
had that ecstatic sense of nearness to some spirit of fire which was
wont to possess me at her contact.

  "At last," she said, "at last, my beloved!" I caressed her.

  "Why," said I, tingling at the nerves, "why have you put this
dolorous journey between us? And what mad freak is your presence in
this swamp?" She uttered her silver laugh, and nestled to me again.

  "I am the creature of this place," she answered. "This is my home. I
have sworn you should behold me in my native sin ere you ravished me
away."

  "Come, then," said I; "I have seen; let there be an end of this. I
know you, what you are. This marsh chokes up my heart. God forbid you
should spend more of your days here. Come."

  "You are in haste," she cried. "There is yet much to learn. Look, my
friend," she said, "you who know me, what I am. This is my prison, and
I have inherited its properties. Have you no fear?"

  For answer I pulled her to me, and her warm lips drove out the
horrid humours of the night; but the swift passage of a flickering
mockery over her eyes struck me as a flash of lightning, and I grew
chill again.

  "I have the marsh in my blood," she whispered: "the marsh and the
fog of it. Think ere you vow to me, for I am the cloud in a starry
night."

  A lithe and lovely creature, palpable of warm flesh, she lifted her
magic face to mine and besought me plaintively with these words. The
dews of the nightfall hung on her lashes, and seemed to plead with me
for her forlorn and solitary plight.

  "Behold!" I cried, "witch or devil of the marsh, you shall come with
me! I have known you on the moors, a roving apparition of beauty;
nothing more I know, nothing more I ask. I care not what this dismal
haunt means; not what these strange and mystic eyes. You have powers
and senses above me; your sphere and habits are as mysterious and
incomprehensible as your beauty. But that," I said, "is mine, and the
world that is mine shall be yours also."

  She moved her head nearer to me with an antic gesture, and her
gleaming eyes glanced up at me with a sudden flash, the similitude
(great heavens!) of a hooded snake. Starting, I fell away, but at that
moment she turned her face and set it fast towards the fog that came
rolling in thick volumes over the flat. Noiselessly the great cloud
crept down upon us, and all dazed and troubled I watched her watching
it in silence. It was as if she awaited some omen of horror, and I too
trembled in the fear of its coming.

  Then suddenly out of the night issued the hoarse and hideous
croaking I had heard upon my passage. I reached out my arm to take her
hand, but in an instant the mists broke over us, and I was groping in
the vacancy. Something like panic took hold of me, and, beating
through the blind obscurity, I rushed over the flat, calling upon her.
In a little the swirl went by, and I perceived her upon the margin of
the swamp, her arm raised as in imperious command. I ran to her, but
stopped, amazed and shaken by a fearful sight. Low by the dripping
reeds crouched a small squat thing, in the likeness of a monstrous
frog, coughing and choking in its throat. As I stared, the creature
rose upon its legs and disclosed a horrid human resemblance. Its face
was white and thin, with long black hair; its body gnarled and twisted
as with the ague of a thousand years. Shaking, it whined in a
breathless voice, pointing a skeleton finger at the woman by my side.

  "Your eyes were my guide," it quavered. "Do you think that after all
these years I have no knowledge of your eyes? Lo, is there aught of
evil in you I am not instructed in? This is the Hell you designed for
me, and now you would leave me to a greater."

  The wretch paused, and panting leaned upon a bush, while she stood
silent, mocking him with her eyes, and soothing my terror with her
soft touch.

  "Hear!" he cried, turning to me, "hear the tale of this woman that
you may know her as she is. She is the Presence of the marshes. Woman
or Devil I know not, but only that the accursed marsh has crept into
her soul and she herself is become its Evil Spirit; she herself, that
lives and grows young and beautiful by it, has its full power to
blight and chill and slay. I, who was once as you are, have this
knowledge. What bones lie deep in this black swamp who can say but
she? She has drained of health, she has drained of mind and of soul;
what is between her and her desire that she should not drain also of
life? She has made me a devil in her Hell, and now she would leave me
to my solitary pain, and go search for another victim. But she shall
not!" he screamed through his chattering teeth; "she shall not! My
Hell is also hers! She shall not!"

  Her smiling untroubled eyes left his face and turned to me: she put
out her arms, swaying towards me, and so fervid and so great a light
glowed in her face that, as one distraught of superhuman means, I took
her into my embrace. And then the madness seized me.

  "Woman or devil," I said, "I will go with you! Of what account this
pitiful past? Blight me even as that wretch, so be only you are with
me."

  She laughed, and, disengaging herself, leaned, half-clinging to me,
towards the coughing creature by the mire.

  "Come," I cried, catching her by the waist. "Come!" She laughed
again a silver-ringing laugh. She moved with me slowly across the flat
to where the track started for the portals of the marsh. She laughed
and clung to me.

  But at the edge of the track I was startled by a shrill, hoarse
screaming; and behold, from my very feet, that loathsome creature rose
up and wound his long black arms about her shrieking and crying in his
pain. Stooping I pushed him from her skirts, and with one sweep of my
arm drew her across the pathway; as her face passed mine her eyes were
wide and smiling. Then of a sudden the still mist enveloped us once
more; but ere it descended I had a glimpse of that contorted figure
trembling on the margin, the white face drawn and full of desolate
pain. At the sight an icy shiver ran through me. And then through the
yellow gloom the shadow of her darted past me to the further side. I
heard the hoarse cough, the dim noise of a struggle, a swishing sound,
a thin cry, and then the sucking of the slime over something in the
rushes. I leapt forward: and once again the fog thinned, and I beheld
her, woman or devil, standing upon the verge, and peering with smiling
eyes into the foul and sickly bog. With a sharp cry wrung from my
nerveless soul, I turned and fled down the narrow way from that
accursed spot; and as I ran the thickening fog closed round me, and I
heard far off and lessening still the silver sound of her mocking
laughter.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


