
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Women of the Wood
Author: Abraham Merritt
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0602041.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: June 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2007

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title: The Women of the Wood
Author: Abraham Merritt



McKAY SAT ON THE BALCONY of the little inn that squatted like a brown
gnome among the pines on the eastern shore of the lake.

It was a small and lonely lake high up in the Vosges; and yet, lonely
is not just the word with which to tag its spirit; rather was it
aloof, withdrawn. The mountains came down on every side, making a
great tree-lined bowl that seemed, when McKay first saw it, to be
filled with the still wine of peace.

McKay had worn the wings in the world war with honor, flying first
with the French and later with his own country's forces. And as a bird
loves the trees, so did McKay love them. To him they were not merely
trunks and roots, branches and leaves; to him they were personalities.
He was acutely aware of differences in character even among the same
species--that pine was benevolent and jolly; that one austere and
monkish; there stood a swaggering bravo, and there dwelt a sage
wrapped in green meditation; that birch was a wanton--the birch near
her was virginal, still a-dream.

The war had sapped him, nerve and brain and soul. Through all the
years that had passed since then the wound had kept open. But now, as
he slid his car down the vast green bowl, he felt its spirit reach out
to him; reach out to him and caress and quiet him, promising him
healing. He seemed to drift like a falling leaf through the clustered
woods; to be cradled by gentle hands of the trees.

He had stopped at the little gnome of an inn, and there he had
lingered, day after day, week after week.

The trees had nursed him; soft whisperings of leaves, slow chant of
the needled pines, had first deadened, then driven from him the re-
echoing clamor of the war and its sorrow. The open wound of his spirit
had closed under their green healing; had closed and become scar; and
even the scar had been covered and buried, as the scars on Earth's
breast are covered and buried beneath the falling leaves of Autumn.
The trees had laid green healing hands on his eyes, banishing the
pictures of war. He had sucked strength from the green breasts of the
hills.

Yet as strength flowed back to him and mind and spirit healed, McKay
had grown steadily aware that the place was troubled; that its
tranquillity was not perfect; that there was ferment of fear within
it.

It was as though the trees had waited until he himself had become
whole before they made their own unrest known to him. Now they were
trying to tell him something; there was a shrillness as of
apprehension, of anger, in the whispering of the leaves, the needled
chanting of the pines.

And it was this that had kept McKay at the inn--a definite
consciousness of appeal, consciousness of something wrong--something
wrong that he was being asked to right. He strained his ears to catch
words in the rustling branches, words that trembled on the brink of
his human understanding.

Never did they cross that brink.

Gradually he had orientated himself, had focused himself, so he
believed, to the point of the valley's unease.

On all the shores of the lake there were but two dwellings. One was
the inn, and around the inn the trees clustered protectively,
confiding; friendly. It was as though they had not only accepted it,
but had made it part of themselves.

Not so was it of the other habitation. Once it had been the hunting
lodge of long dead lords; now it was half ruined, forlorn. It stood
across the lake almost exactly opposite the inn and back upon the
slope a half mile from the shore. Once there had been fat fields
around it and a fair orchard.

The forest had marched down upon them. Here and there in the fields,
scattered pines and poplars stood like soldiers guarding some outpost;
scouting parties of saplings lurked among the gaunt and broken fruit
trees. But the forest had not had its way unchecked; ragged stumps
showed where those who dwelt in the old lodge had cut down the
invaders, blackened patches of the woodland showed where they had
fired the woods.

Here was the conflict he had sensed. Here the green folk of the forest
were both menaced and menacing; at war. The lodge was a fortress
beleaguered by the woods, a fortress whose garrison sallied forth with
axe and torch to take their toll of the besiegers.

Yet McKay sensed the inexorable pressing-in of the forest; he saw it
as a green army ever filling the gaps in its enclosing ranks, shooting
its seeds into the cleared places, sending its roots out to sap them;
and armed always with a crushing patience, a patience drawn from the
stone breasts of the eternal hills.

He had the impression of constant regard of watchfulness, as though
night and day the forest kept its myriads of eyes upon the lodge;
inexorably, not to be swerved from its purpose. He had spoken of this
impression to the inn keeper and his wife, and they had looked at him
oddly.

"Old Polleau does not love the trees, no," the old man had said. "No,
nor do his two sons. They do not love the trees--and very certainly
the trees do not love them."

Between the lodge and the shore, marching down to the verge of the
lake was a singularly beautiful little coppice of silver birches and
firs. The coppice stretched for perhaps a quarter of a mile, was not
more than a hundred feet or two in depth, and it was not alone the
beauty of its trees but their curious grouping that aroused McKay's
interest so vividly. At each end of the coppice were a dozen or more
of the glistening needled firs, not clustered but spread out as though
in open marching order; at widely spaced intervals along its other two
sides paced single firs. The birches, slender and delicate, grew
within the guard of these sturdier trees, yet not so thickly as to
crowd each other.

To McKay the silver birches were for all the world like some gay
caravan of lovely demoiselles under the protection of debonair
knights. With that odd other sense of his he saw the birches as
delectable damsels, merry and laughing--the pines as lovers,
troubadours in their green-needled mail. And when the winds blew and
the crests of the trees bent under them, it was as though dainty
demoiselles picked up fluttering, leafy skirts, bent leafy hoods and
danced while the knights of the firs drew closer round them, locked
arms with theirs and danced with them to the roaring horns of the
winds. At such times he almost heard sweet laughter from the birches,
shoutings from the firs.

Of all the trees in that place McKay loved best this little wood; had
rowed across and rested in its shade, had dreamed there and, dreaming,
had heard again elfin echoes of the sweet laughter; eyes closed, had
heard mysterious whisperings and the sound of dancing feet light as
falling leaves; had taken dream draught of that gaiety which was the
soul of the little wood.

And two days ago he had seen Polleau and his two sons. McKay had been
dreaming in the coppice all that afternoon. As dusk began to fall he
had reluctantly arisen and begun the row back to the inn. When he had
been a few hundred feet from shore three men had come out from the
trees and had stood watching him--three grim, powerful men taller than
the average French peasant.

He had called a friendly greeting to them, but they had not answered
it; stood there, scowling. Then as he bent again to his oars, one of
the sons had raised a hatchet and had driven it savagely into the
trunk of a slim birch beside him. He thought he heard a thin wailing
cry from the stricken tree, a sigh from all the little wood.

McKay had felt as though the keen edge had bitten into his own flesh.

"Stop that!" he had cried. "Stop it, damn you!"

For answer the son had struck again--and never had McKay seen hate
etched so deep as on his face as he struck. Cursing, a killing rage in
heart, had swung the boat around, raced back to shore. He had heard
the hatchet strike again and again and, close now to shore, had heard
a crackling and over it once more the thin, high wailing. He had
turned to look.

The birch was tottering, was falling. But as it had fallen he had seen
a curious thing. Close beside it grew one of the firs, and, as the
smaller tree crashed over, it dropped upon the fir like a fainting
maid in the arms of a lover. And as it lay and trembled there, one of
the great branches of the fir slipped from under it, whipped out and
smote the hatchet wielder a crushing blow upon the head, sending him
to earth.

It had been, of course, only the chance blow of a bough, bent by
pressure of the fallen tree and then released as that tree slipped
down. But there had been such suggestion of conscious action in the
branch's recoil, so much of bitter anger in it, so much, in truth, had
it been like the vengeful blow of a man that McKay had felt an eerie
prickling of his scalp, his heart had missed its beat.

For a moment Polleau and the standing son had stared at the sturdy fir
with the silvery birch lying on its green breast and folded in,
shielded by, its needled boughs as though--again the swift impression
came to McKay--as though it were a wounded maid stretched on breast,
in arms, of knightly lover. For a long moment father and son had
stared.

Then, still wordless but with that same bitter hatred on both their
faces, they had stopped and picked up the other and with his arms
around the neck of each had borne him limply away.

McKay, sitting on the balcony of the inn that morning, went over and
over that scene; realized more and more clearly the human aspect of
fallen birch and clasping fir, and the conscious deliberateness of the
fir's blow. And during the two days that had elapsed since then, he
had felt the unease of the trees increase, their whispering appeal
became more urgent.

What were they trying to tell him? What did they want him to do?

Troubled, he stared across the lake, trying to pierce the mists that
hung over it and hid the opposite shore. And suddenly it seemed that
he heard the coppice calling him, felt it pull the point of his
attention toward it irresistibly, as the lodestone swings and holds
the compass needle.

The coppice called him, bade him come to it.

Instantly McKay obeyed the command; he arose and walked down to the
boat landing; he stepped into his skin and began to row across the
lake. As his oars touched the water his trouble fell from him. In its
place flowed peace and a curious exaltation.

The mist was thick upon the lake. There was no breath of wind, yet the
mist billowed and drifted, shook and curtained under the touch of
unfelt airy hands.

They were alive--the mists; they formed themselves into fantastic
palaces past whose opalescent facades he saw; they built themselves
into hills and valleys and circled plains whose floors were rippling
silk. Tiny rainbows gleamed out among them, and upon the water
prismatic patches shone and spread like spilled wine of opals. He had
the illusion of vast distances--the hills of mist were real mountains,
the valleys between them were not illusory. He was a colossus cleaving
through some elfin world. A trout broke, and it was like leviathan
leaping from the fathomless deep. Around the arc of its body rainbows
interlaced and then dissolved into rain of softly gleaming gems--
diamonds in dance with sapphires, flame-hearted rubies and pearls with
shimmering souls of rose. The fish vanished, diving cleanly without
sound; the jewelled bows vanished with it; a tiny irised whirlpool
swirled for an instant where trout and flashing arcs had been.

Nowhere was there sound. He let his oars drop and leaned forward,
drifting. In the silence, before him and around him, he felt opening
the gateways of an unknown world.

And suddenly he heard the sound of voices, many voices; faint at first
and murmurous; louder they became, swiftly; women's voices sweet and
lilting and mingled with them the deeper tones of men. Voices that
lifted and fell in a wild, gay chanting through whose joyesse ran
undertones both of sorrow and of rage--as though faery weavers
threaded through silk spun of sunbeams sombre strands dipped in the
black of graves and crimson strands stained in the red of wrathful
sunsets.

He drifted on, scarce daring to breathe lest even that faint sound
break the elfin song. Closer it rang and clearer; and now he became
aware that the speed of his boat was increasing, that it was no longer
drifting; that it was as though the little waves on each side were
pushing him ahead with soft and noiseless palms. His boat grounded and
as it rustled along over the smooth pebbles of the beach the song
ceased.

McKay half arose and peered before him. The mists were thicker here
but he could see the outlines of the coppice. It was like looking at
it through many curtains of fine gauze; its trees seemed shifting,
ethereal, unreal. And moving among the trees were figures that
threaded the boles and flitted in rhythmic measures like the shadows
of leafy boughs swaying to some cadenced wind.

He stepped ashore and made his way slowly toward them. The mists
dropped behind him, shutting off all sight of shore.

The rhythmic flittings ceased; there was now no movement as there was
no sound among the trees--yet he felt the little woods abrim with
watching life. McKay tried to speak; there was a spell of silence on
his mouth.

"You called me. I have come to listen to you--to help you if I can."

The words formed within his mind, but utter them he could not. Over
and over he tried, desperately; the words seemed to die before his
lips could give them life.

A pillar of mist whirled forward and halted, eddying half an arm
length away. And suddenly out of it peered a woman's face, eyes level
with his own. A woman's face--yes; but McKay, staring into those
strange eyes probing his, knew that face though it seemed it was that
of no woman of human breed. They were without pupils, the irises deer-
like and of the soft green of deep forest dells; within them sparkled
tiny star points of light like motes in a moon beam. The eyes were
wide and set far apart beneath a broad, low brow over which was piled
braid upon braid of hair of palest gold, braids that seemed spun of
shining ashes of gold. Her nose was small and straight, her mouth
scarlet and exquisite. The face was oval, tapering to a delicately
pointed chin.

Beautiful was that face, but its beauty was an alien one; elfin. For
long moments the strange eyes thrust their gaze deep into his. Then
out of the mist two slender white arms stole, the hands long, fingers
tapering. The tapering fingers touched his ears.

"He shall hear," whispered the red lips.

Immediately from all about him a cry arose; in it was the whispering
and rustling of the leaves beneath the breath of the winds, the
shrilling of the harp strings of the boughs, the laughter of hidden
brooks, the shoutings of waters flinging themselves down to deep and
rocky pools--the voices of the woods made articulate.

"He shall hear!" they cried.

The long white fingers rested on his lips, and their touch was cool as
bark of birch on cheek after some long upward climb through forest;
cool and subtly sweet.

"He shall speak," whispered the scarlet lips.

"He shall speak!" answered the wood voices again, as though in litany.

"He shall see," whispered the woman and the cool fingers touched his
eyes.

"He shall see!" echoed the wood voices.

The mists that had hidden the coppice from McKay wavered, thinned and
were gone. In their place was a limpid, translucent, palely green
ether, faintly luminous--as though he stood within some clear wan
emerald. His feet pressed a golden moss spangled with tiny starry
bluets. Fully revealed before him was the woman of the strange eyes
and the face of elfin beauty. He dwelt for a moment upon the slender
shoulders, the firm small tip-tilted breasts, the willow litheness of
her body. From neck to knees a smock covered her, sheer and silken and
delicate as though spun of cobwebs; through it her body gleamed as
though fire of the young Spring moon ran in her veins.

Beyond her, upon the golden moss were other women like her, many of
them; they stared at him with the same wide set green eyes in which
danced the clouds of sparkling moonbeam motes; like her they were
crowned with glistening, pallidly golden hair; like hers too were
their oval faces with the pointed chins and perilous elfin beauty.
Only where she stared at him gravely, measuring him, weighing him--
there were those of these her sisters whose eyes were mocking; and
those whose eyes called to him with a weirdly tingling allure, their
mouths athirst; those whose eyes looked upon him with curiosity alone
and those whose great eyes pleaded with him, prayed to him.

Within that pellucid, greenly luminous air McKay was abruptly aware
that the trees of the coppice still had a place. Only now they were
spectral indeed; they were like white shadows cast athwart a glaucous
screen; trunk and bough, twig and leaf they arose around him and they
were as though etched in air by phantom craftsmen--thin,
unsubstantial; they were ghost trees rooted in another space.

Suddenly he was aware that there were men among the women; men whose
eyes were set wide apart as were theirs, as strange and pupilless as
were theirs but with irises of brown and blue; men with pointed chins
and oval faces, broad shouldered and clad in kirtles of darkest green;
swarthy-skinned men muscular and strong, with that same little grace
of the women--and like them of a beauty alien and elfin.

McKay heard a little wailing cry. He turned. Close beside him lay a
girl clasped in the arms of one of the swarthy, green-clad men. She
lay upon his breast. His eyes were filled with a black flame of wrath,
and hers were misted, anguished. For an instant McKay had a glimpse of
the birch old Polleau's son had sent crashing down into the boughs of
the fir. He saw birch and fir as immaterial outlines around the man
and girl. For an instant girl and man and birch and fir seemed one and
the same. The scarlet-lipped woman touched his shoulder, and the
confusion cleared.

"She withers," sighed the woman, and in her voice McKay heard a faint
rustling as of mournful leaves. "Now is it not pitiful that she
withers--our sister who was so young, so slender and so lovely?"

McKay looked again at the girl. The white skin seemed shrunken; the
moon radiance that gleamed through the bodies of the others in hers
was dim and pallid; her slim arms hung listlessly; her body drooped.
The mouth too was wan and parched, the long and misted green eyes
dull. The palely golden hair lustreless, and dry. He looked on slow
death--a withering death.

"May the arm that struck her down wither!" the green-clad man who held
her shouted, and in his voice McKay heard a savage strumming as of
winter winds through bleak boughs: "May his heart wither and the sun
blast him! May the rain and the waters deny him and the winds scourge
him!"

"I thirst," whispered the girl.

There was a stirring among the watching women. One came forward
holding a chalice that was like thin leaves turned to green crystal.
She paused beside the trunk of one of the spectral trees, reached up
and drew down to her a branch. A slim girl with half-frightened, half-
resentful eyes glided to her side and threw her arms around the
ghostly bole. The woman with the chalice bent the branch and cut it
deep with what seemed an arrow-shaped flake of jade. From the wound a
faintly opalescent liquid slowly filled the cup. When it was filled
the woman beside McKay stepped forward and pressed her own long hands
around the bleeding branch. She stepped away and McKay saw that the
stream had ceased to flow. She touched the trembling girl and
unclasped her arms.

"It is healed," said the woman gently. "And it was your turn, little
sister. The wound is healed. Soon, you will have forgotten."

The woman with the chalice knelt and set it to the wan, dry lips of
her who was--withering. She drank of it, thirstily, to the last drop.
The misty eyes cleared, they sparkled; the lips that had been so
parched and pale grew red, the white body gleamed as though the waning
light had been fed with new.

"Sing, sisters," she cried, and shrilly. "Dance for me, sisters!"

Again burst out that chant McKay had heard as he had floated through
the mists upon the lake. Now, as then, despite his opened ears, he
could distinguish no words, but clearly he understood its mingled
themes--the joy of Spring's awakening, rebirth, with the green life
streaming singing up through every bough, swelling the buds,
burgeoning with tender leaves the branches; the dance of the trees in
the scented winds of Spring; the drums of the jubilant rain on leafy
hoods; passion of Summer sun pouring its golden flood down upon the
trees; the moon passing with stately step and slow and green hands
stretching up to her and drawing from her breast milk of silver fire;
riot of wild gay winds with their mad pipings and strummings;--soft
interlacing of boughs, the kiss of amorous leaves--all these and more,
much more that McKay could not understand since it dealt with hidden,
secret things for which man has no images, were in that chanting.

And all these and more were in the measures, the rhythms of the
dancing of those strange, green eyed women and brown skinned men;
something incredibly ancient yet young as the speeding moment,
something of a world before and beyond man.

McKay listened, McKay watched, lost in wonder; his own world more than
half forgotten; his mind meshed in web of green sorcery.

The woman beside him touched his arm. She pointed to the girl.

"Yet she withers," she said. "And not all our life, if we poured it
through her lips, could save her."

He looked; he saw that the red was draining slowly from the girl's
lips, the luminous life tides waning; the eyes that had been so bright
were misting and growing dull once more, suddenly a great pity and a
great rage shook him. He knelt beside her, took her hands in his.

"Take them away! Take away your hands! They burn me!" she moaned.

"He tries to help you," whispered the green-clad man, gently. But he
reached over and drew McKay's hands away.

"Not so can you help her," said the woman.

"What can I do?" McKay arose, looked helplessly from one to the other.
"What can I do to help?"

The chanting died, the dance stopped. A silence fell and he felt upon
him the eyes of all. They were tense--waiting. The woman took his
hands. Their touch was cool and sent a strange sweetness sweeping
through his veins.

"There are three men yonder," she said. "They hate us. Soon we shall
be as she is there--withering. They have sworn it, and as they have
sworn so will they do. Unless--"

She paused; and McKay felt the stirrings of a curious unease. The
moonbeam dancing motes in her eyes had changed to tiny sparklings of
red. In a way, deep down, they terrified him--those red sparklings.

"Three men?"--in his clouded mind was the memory of Polleau and his
two strong sons. "Three men," he repeated, stupidly--"But what are
three men to you who are so many? What could three men do against
those stalwart gallants of yours?"

"No," she shook her head. "No--there is nothing our--men--can do;
nothing that we can do. Once, night and day, we were gay. Now we
fear--night and day. They mean to destroy us. Our kin have warned us.
And our kin cannot help us. Those three are masters of blade and
flame. Against blade and flame we are helpless."

"Blade and flame!" echoed the listeners. "Against blade and flame we
are helpless."

"Surely will they destroy us," murmured the woman. "We shall wither
all of us. Like her there, or burn--unless--"

Suddenly she threw white arms around McKay's neck. She pressed her
lithe body close to him. Her scarlet mouth sought and found his lips
and clung to them. Through all McKay's body ran swift, sweet flames,
green fire of desire. His own arms went round her, crushed her to him.

"You shall not die!" he cried. "No--by God, you shall not!"

She drew back her head, looked deep into his eyes.

"They have sworn to destroy us," she said, "and soon. With blade and
flame they will destroy us--these three--unless--"

"Unless?" he asked, fiercely.

"Unless you--slay them first!" she answered.

A cold shock ran through McKay, chilling the green sweet fires of his
desire. He dropped his arm from around the woman; thrust her from him.
For an instant she trembled before him.

"Slay!" he heard her whisper--and she was gone. The spectral trees
wavered; their outlines thickened out of immateriality into substance.
The green translucence darkened. He had a swift vertiginous moment as
though he swung between two worlds. He closed his eyes. The vertigo
passed and he opened them, looked around him.

McKay stood on the lakeward skirts of the little coppice. There were
no shadows flitting, no sign of the white women and the swarthy, green
clad men. His feet were on green moss; gone was the soft golden carpet
with its blue starlets. Birches and firs clustered solidly before him.
At his left was a sturdy fir in whose needled arms a broken birch tree
lay withering. It was the birch that Polleau's men had so wantonly
slashed down. For an instant he saw within the fir and birch the
immaterial outlines of the green-clad man and the slim girl who
withered. For that instant birch and fir and girl and man seemed one
and the same. He stepped back, and his hands touched the smooth, cool
bark of another birch that rose close at his right.

Upon his hands the touch of that bark was like--was like?--yes,
curiously was it like the touch of the long slim hands of the woman of
the scarlet lips. But it gave him none of that alien rapture, that
pulse of green life her touch had brought. Yet, now as then, the touch
steadied him. The outlines of girl and man were gone.

He looked upon nothing but a sturdy fir with a withering birch fallen
into its branches.

McKay stood there, staring, wondering, like a man who has but half
awakened from dream. And suddenly a little wind stirred the leaves of
the rounded birch beside him. The leaves murmured, sighed. The wind
grew stronger and the leaves whispered.

"Slay!" he heard them whisper--and again: "Slay! Help us! Slay!"

And the whisper was the voice of the woman of the scarlet lips!

Rage, swift and unreasoning, sprang up in McKay. He began to run up
through the coppice, up to where he knew was the old lodge in which
dwelt Polleau and his sons. And as he ran the wind blew stronger, and
louder and louder grew the whisperings of the trees.

"Slay!" they whispered. "Slay them! Save us! Slay!"

"I will slay! I will save you!" McKay, panting, hammer pulse beating
in his ears, rushing through the woods heard himself answering that
ever louder, ever more insistent command. And in his mind was but one
desire--to clutch the throats of Polleau and his sons, to crack their
necks; to stand by them then and watch them wither; wither like that
slim girl in the arms of the green-clad man.

So crying, he came to the edge of the coppice and burst from it out
into a flood of sunshine. For a hundred feet he ran, and then he was
aware that the whispering command was stilled; that he heard no more
that maddening rustling of wrathful leaves. A spell seemed to have
been loosed from him; it was as though he had broken through some web
of sorcery. McKay stopped, dropped upon the ground, buried his face in
the grasses.

He lay there, marshalling his thoughts into some order of sanity. What
had he been about to do? To rush berserk upon those three who lived in
the old lodge and--kill them! And for what? Because that elfin,
scarlet-lipped woman whose kisses he still could feel upon his mouth
had bade him! Because the whispering trees of the little wood had
maddened him with that same command!

And for this he had been about to kill three men!

What were that woman and her sisters and the green-clad swarthy
gallants of theirs? Illusions of some waking dream--phantoms born of
the hypnosis of the swirling mists through which he had rowed and
floated across the lake? Such things were not uncommon. McKay knew of
those who by watching the shifting clouds could create and dwell for a
time with wide open eyes within some similar land of fantasy; knew
others who needed but to stare at smoothly falling water to set
themselves within a world of waking dream; there were those who could
summon dreams by gazing into a ball of crystal, others found their
phantoms in saucers of shining ebon ink.

Might not the moving mists have laid those same hypnotic fingers upon
his own mind--and his love for the trees the sense of appeal that he
had felt so long and his memory of the wanton slaughter of the slim
birch have all combined to paint upon his drugged consciousness the
phantasms he had beheld?

Then in the flood of sunshine the spell had melted, his consciousness
leaped awake?

McKay arose to his feet, shakily enough. He looked back at the
coppice. There was no wind now, the leaves were silent, motionless.
Again he saw it as the caravan of demoiselles with their marching
knights and troubadours. But no longer was it gay. The words of the
scarlet-lipped woman came back to him--that gaiety had fled and fear
had taken its place. Dream phantom or--dryad, whatever she was, half
of that at least was truth.

He turned, a plan forming in his mind. Reason with himself as he
might, something deep within him stubbornly asserted the reality of
his experience. At any rate, he told himself, the little wood was far
too beautiful to be despoiled. He would put aside the experience as
dream--but he would save the little wood for the essence of beauty
that it held in its green cup.

The old lodge was about a quarter of a mile away. A path led up to it
through the ragged fields. McKay walked up the path, climbed rickety
steps and paused, listening. He heard voices and knocked. The door was
flung open and old Polleau stood there, peering at him through half
shut, suspicious eyes. One of the sons stood close behind him. They
stared at McKay with grim, hostile faces.

He thought he heard a faint, far off despairing whisper from the
distant wood. And it was as though the pair in the doorway heard it
too, for their gaze shifted from him to the coppice, and he saw hatred
flicker swiftly across their grim faces; their gaze swept back to him.

"What do you want?" demanded Polleau, curtly.

"I am a neighbor of yours, stopping at the inn--" began McKay,
courteously.

"I know who you are," Polleau interrupted brusquely. "But what is it
that you want?"

"I find the air of this place good for me," McKay stifled a rising
anger. "I am thinking of staying for a year or more until my health is
fully recovered. I would like to buy some of your land and build me a
lodge upon it."

"Yes, M'sieu?" there was acid politeness now in the powerful old man's
voice. "But is it permitted to ask why you do not remain at the inn?
Its fare is excellent and you are well liked there."

"I have desire to be alone," replied McKay. "I do not like people too
close to me. I would have my own land, and sleep under my own roof."

"But why come to me?" asked Polleau. "There are many places upon the
far side of the lake that you could secure. It is happy there, and
this side is not happy, M'sieu. But tell me, what part of my land is
it that you desire?"

"That little wood yonder," answered McKay, and pointed to the coppice.

"Ah! I thought so!" whispered Polleau, and between him and his sons
passed a look of bitter understanding. He looked at McKay, sombrely.

"That wood is not for sale, M'sieu," he said at last. "I can afford to
pay well for what I want," said McKay. "Name your price."

"It is not for sale," repeated Polleau, stolidly, "at any price."

"Oh, come," laughed McKay, although his heart sank at the finality in
that answer. "You have many acres and what is it but a few trees? I
can afford to gratify my fancies. I will give you all the worth of
your other land for it."

"You have asked what that place that you so desire is, and you have
answered that it is but a few trees," said Polleau, slowly, and the
tall son behind him laughed, abruptly, maliciously. "But it is more
than that, M'sieu--Oh, much more than that. And you know it, else why
would you pay such price? Yes, you know it--since you know also that
we are ready to destroy it, and you would save it. And who told you
all that, M'sieu?" he snarled.

There was such malignance in the face thrust suddenly close to
McKay's, teeth bared by uplifted lip, that involuntarily he recoiled.

"But a few trees!" snarled old Polleau. "Then who told him what we
mean to do--eh, Pierre?"

Again the son laughed. And at that laughter McKay felt within him
resurgence of his own blind hatred as he had fled through the
whispering wood. He mastered himself, turned away, there was nothing
he could do--now. Polleau halted him.

"M'sieu," he said. "Wait. Enter. There is something I would tell you;
something too I would show you. Something, perhaps, that I would ask
you."

He stood aside, bowing with a rough courtesy. McKay walked through the
doorway. Polleau with his son followed him. He entered a large, dim
room whose ceiling was spanned with smoke blackened beams. From these
beams hung onion strings and herbs and smoke cured meats. On one side
was a wide fireplace. Huddled beside it sat Polleau's other son. He
glanced up as they entered and McKay saw that a bandage covered one
side of his head, hiding his left eye. McKay recognized him as the one
who had cut down the slim birch. The blow of the fir, he reflected
with a certain satisfaction, had been no futile one.

Old Polleau strode over to that son.

"Look, M'sieu," he said and lifted the bandage.

McKay with a faint tremor of horror, saw a gaping blackened socket,
red rimmed and eyeless.

"Good God, Polleau!" he cried. "But this man needs medical attention.
I know something of wounds. Let me go across the lake and bring back
my kit. I will attend him."

Old Polleau shook his head, although his grim face for the first time
softened. He drew the bandages back in place.

"It heals," he said. "We have some skill in such things. You saw what
did it. You watched from your boat as the cursed tree struck him. The
eye was crushed and lay upon his cheek. I cut it away. Now he heals.
We do not need your aid, M'sieu."

"Yet he ought not have cut the birch," muttered McKay, more to himself
than to be heard.

"Why not?" asked old Polleau, fiercely. "Since it hated him."

McKay stared at him. What did this old peasant know? The words
strengthened that deep stubborn conviction that what he had seen and
heard in the coppice had been actuality--no dream. And still more did
Pollearu's next words strengthen that conviction.

"M'sieu," he said, "you come here as ambassador--of a sort. The wood
has spoken to you. Well, as ambassador I shall speak to you. Four
centuries my people have lived in this place. A century we have owned
this land. M'sieu, in all those years there has been no moment that
the trees have not hated us--nor we the trees.

"For all those hundred years there have been hatred and battle between
us and the forest. My father, M'sieu, was crushed by a tree; my elder
brother crippled by another. My father's father, woodsman that he was,
was lost in the forest--he came back to us with mind gone, raving of
wood women who had bewitched and mocked him, luring him into swamp and
fen and tangled thicket, tormenting him. In every generation the trees
have taken their toll of us--women as well as men--maiming or killing
us."

"Accidents," interrupted McKay. "This is childish, Polleau. You cannot
blame the trees."

"In your heart you do not believe so," said Polleau. "Listen, the feud
is an ancient one. Centuries ago it began when we were serfs, slaves
of the nobles. To cook, to keep us warm in winter, they let us pick up
the fagots, the dead branches and twigs that dropped from the trees.
But if we cut down a tree to keep us warm, to keep our women and our
children warm, yes, if we but tore down a branch--they hanged us, or
they threw us into dungeons to rot, or whipped us till our backs were
red lattices.

"They had their broad fields, the nobles--but we must raise our food
in the patches where the trees disdained to grow. And if they did
thrust themselves into our poor patches, then, M'sieu, we must let
them have their way--or be flogged, or be thrown into the dungeons or
be hanged.

"They pressed us in--the trees," the old man's voice grew sharp with
fanatic hatred. "They stole our fields and they took the food from the
mouths of our children; they dropped their fagots to us like dole to
beggars; they tempted us to warmth when the cold struck our bones--and
they bore us as fruit a-swing at the end of the foresters' ropes if we
yielded to their tempting.

"Yes, M'sieu--we died of cold that they might live! Our children died
of hunger that their young might find root space! They despised us--
the trees! We died that they might live--and we were men!

"Then, M'sieu came the Revolution and the freedom. Ah, M'sieu, then we
took our toll! Great logs roaring in the winter cold--no more huddling
over the alms of fagots. Fields where the trees had been--no more
starving of our children that theirs might live. Now the trees were
the slaves and we the masters.

"And the trees knew and they hated us!

"But blow for blow, a hundred of their lives for each life of ours--we
have returned their hatred. With axe and torch we have fought them--

"The trees!" shrieked Polleau, suddenly, eyes blazing red rage, face
writhing, foam at the corners of his mouth and gray hair clutched in
rigid hands--"The cursed trees! Armies of the trees creeping--
creeping--closer, ever closer--crushing us in! Stealing our fields as
they did of old! Building their dungeon round us as they built of old
the dungeons of stone! Creeping--creeping! Armies of trees! Legions of
trees! The trees! The cursed trees!"

McKay listened, appalled. Here was crimson heart of hate. Madness! But
what was at the root of it? Some deep inherited instinct, coming down
from forefathers who had hated the forest as the symbol of their
masters. Forefathers whose tides of hatred had overflowed to the green
life on which the nobles had laid their tabu--as one neglected child
will hate the favorite on whom love and gifts are lavished? In such
warped minds the crushing fall of a tree, the maiming sweep of a
branch, might well appear as deliberate, the natural growth of the
forest seem the implacable advance of an enemy.

And yet--the blow of the fir as the cut birch fell had been
deliberate! and there had been those women of the wood--

"Patience," the standing son touched the old man's shoulder.
"Patience! Soon we strike our blow."

Some of the frenzy died out of Polleau's face.

"Though we cut down a hundred," he whispered, "By the hundred they
return! But one of us, when they strike--he does not return. No! They
have numbers and they have--time. We are now but three, and we have
little time. They watch us as we go through the forest, alert to trip,
to strike, to crush!

"But M'sieu," he turned blood-shot eyes to McKay. "We strike our blow,
even as Pierre has said. We strike at the coppice that you so desire.
We strike there because it is the very heart of the forest. There the
secret life of the forest runs at full tide. We know--and you know!
Something that, destroyed, will take the heart out of the forest--will
make it know us for its masters."

"The women!" the standing son's eyes glittered, "I have seen the women
there! The fair women with the shining skins who invite--and mock and
vanish before hands can seize them."

"The fair women who peer into our windows in the night--and mock us!"
muttered the eyeless son.

"They shall mock no more!" shouted Polleau, the frenzy again taking
him. "Soon they shall lie, dying! All of them--all of them! They die!"

He caught McKay by the shoulders, shook him like a child.

"Go tell them that!" he shouted. "Say to them that this very day we
destroy them. Say to them it is we who will laugh when winter comes
and we watch their round white bodies blaze in this hearth of ours and
warm us! Go--tell them that!"

He spun McKay around, pushed him to the door, opened it and flung him
staggering down the steps. He heard the tall son laugh, the door
close. Blind with rage he rushed up the steps and hurled himself
against the door. Again the tall son laughed. McKay beat at the door
with clenched fists, cursing. The three within paid no heed. Despair
began to dull his rage. Could the trees help him--counsel him? He
turned and walked slowly down the field path to the little wood.

Slowly and ever more slowly he went as he neared it. He had failed. He
was a messenger bearing a warrant of death. The birches were
motionless; their leaves hung listlessly. It was as though they knew
he had failed. He paused at the edge of the coppice. He looked at his
watch, noted with faint surprise that already it was high noon. Short
shrift enough had the little wood. The work of destruction would not
be long delayed.

McKay squared his shoulders and passed in between the trees. It was
strangely silent in the coppice. And it was mournful. He had a sense
of life brooding around him, withdrawn into itself; sorrowing. He
passed through the silent, mournful wood until he reached the spot
where the rounded, gleaming barked tree stood close to the fir that
held the withering birch. Still there was no sound, no movement. He
laid his hands upon the cool bark of the rounded tree.

"Let me see again!" he whispered. "Let me hear! Speak to me!"

There was no answer. Again and again he called. The coppice was
silent. He wandered through it, whispering, calling. The slim birches
stood, passive with limbs and leaves adroop like listless arms and
hands of captive maids awaiting with dull woe the will of conquerors.
The firs seemed to crouch like hopeless men with heads in hands. His
heart ached to the woe that filled the little wood, this hopeless
submission of the trees.

When, he wondered, would Polleau strike. He looked at his watch again;
an hour had gone by. How long would Polleau wait? He dropped to the
moss, back against a smooth bole.

And suddenly it seemed to McKay that he was a madman--as mad as
Polleau and his sons. Calmly, he went over the old peasant's
indictment of the forest; recalled the face and eyes filled with the
fanatic hate. Madness! After all, the trees were--only trees. Polleau
and his sons--so he reasoned--had transferred to them the bitter
hatred their forefathers had felt for those old lords who had enslaved
them; had laid upon them too all the bitterness of their own struggle
to exist in this high forest land. When they struck at the trees, it
was the ghosts of these forefathers striking at the nobles who had
oppressed them; it was themselves striking against their own destiny.
The trees were but symbols. It was the warped minds of Polleau and his
sons that clothed them in false semblance of conscious life in blind
striving to wreak vengeance against the ancient masters and the
destiny that had made their lives hard and unceasing battle against
Nature. The nobles were long dead; destiny can be brought to grips by
no man. But the trees were here and alive. Clothed in mirage, through
them the driving lust for vengeance could be sated.

And he, McKay, was it not his own deep love and sympathy for the trees
that similarly had clothed them in that false semblance of conscious
life? Had he not built his own mirage? The trees did not really mourn,
could not suffer, could not--know. It was his own sorrow that he had
transferred to them; only his own sorrow that he felt echoing back to
him from them.

The trees were--only trees.

Instantly, upon the heels of that thought, as though it were an
answer, he was aware that the trunk against which he leaned was
trembling; that the whole coppice was trembling; that all the little
leaves were shaking, tremulously.

McKay, bewildered, leaped to his feet. Reason told him that it was the
wind--yet there was no wind!

And as he stood there, a sighing arose as though a mournful breeze
were blowing through the trees--and again there was no wind!

Louder grew the sighing and within it now faint wailings.

"They come! They come! Farewell, sisters! Sisters--farewell!"

Clearly he heard the mournful whispers.

McKay began to run through the trees to the trail that led out to the
fields of the old lodge. And as he ran the wood darkened as though
clear shadows gathered in it, as though vast unseen wings hovered over
it. The trembling of the coppice increased; bough touched bough, clung
to each other; and louder became the sorrowful crying:

"Farewell, sister! Sister--farewell!"

McKay burst out into the open. Halfway between him and the lodge were
Polleau and his sons. They saw him; they pointed and lifted mockingly
to him bright axes. He crouched, waiting for them to come, all fine
spun theories gone and rising within him that same rage that hours
before had sent him out to slay.

So crouching, he heard from the forested hills a roaring clamor. From
every quarter it came, wrathful, menacing; like the voices of legions
of great trees bellowing through the horns of tempest. The clamor
maddened McKay; fanned the flame of rage to white heat.

If the three men heard it, they gave no sign. They came on steadily,
jeering at him, waving their keen blades. He ran to meet them.

"Go back!" he shouted. "Go back, Polleau! I warn you!"

"He warns us!" jeered Polleau. "He--Pierre, Jean--he warns us!"

The old peasant's arm shot out and his hand caught McKay's shoulder
with a grip that pinched to the bone. The arm flexed and hurled him
against the unmaimed son. The son caught him, twisted him about and
whirled him headlong a dozen yards, crashing him through the brush at
the skirt of the wood.

McKay sprang to his feet howling like a wolf. The clamor of the forest
had grown stronger.

"Kill!" it roared. "Kill!"

The unmaimed son had raised his axe. He brought it down upon the trunk
of a birch, half splitting it with one blow. McKay heard a wail go up
from the little wood. Before the axe could be withdrawn he had crashed
a fist in the axe wielder's face. The head of Polleau's son rocked
back; he yelped, and before McKay could strike again had wrapped
strong arms around him, crushing breath from him. McKay relaxed, went
limp, and the son loosened his grip. Instantly McKay slipped out of it
and struck again, springing aside to avoid the rib breaking clasp.
Polleau's son was quicker than he, the long arms caught him. But as
the arms tightened, there was the sound of sharp splintering and the
birch into which the axe had bitten toppled. It struck the ground
directly behind the wrestling men. Its branches seemed to reach out
and clutch at the feet of Polleau's son.

He tripped and fell backward, McKay upon him. The shock of the fall
broke his grip and again McKay writhed free. Again he was upon his
feet, and again Polleau's strong son, quick as he, faced him. Twice
McKay's blows found their mark beneath his heart before once more the
long arms trapped him. But their grip was weaker; McKay felt that now
his strength was equal.

Round and round they rocked, McKay straining to break away. They fell,
and over they rolled and over, arms and legs locked, each striving to
free a hand to grip the other's throat. Around them ran Polleau and
the one-eyed son, shouting encouragement to Pierre, yet neither daring
to strike at McKay lest the blow miss and be taken by the other.

And all that time McKay heard the little wood shouting. Gone from it
now was all mournfulness, all passive resignation. The wood was alive
and raging. He saw the trees shake and bend as though torn by a
tempest. Dimly he realized that the others must hear none of this, see
none of it; as dimly wondered why this should be.

"Kill!" shouted the coppice--and over its tumult he heard the roar of
the great forest:

"Kill! Kill!"

He became aware of two shadowy shapes, shadowy shapes of swarthy green-clad men, that pressed close to him as he rolled and fought.

"Kill!" they whispered. "Let his blood flow! Kill! Let his blood
flow!"

He tore a wrist free from the son's clutch. Instantly he felt within
his hand the hilt of a knife.

"Kill!" whispered the shadowy men.

"Kill!" shrieked the coppice.

"Kill!" roared the forest.

McKay's free arm swept up and plunged the knife into the throat of
Polleau's son! He heard a choking sob; heard Polleau shriek; felt the
hot blood spurt in face and over hand; smelt its salt and faintly
acrid odor. The encircling arms dropped from him; he reeled to his
feet.

As though the blood had been a bridge, the shadowy men leaped from
immateriality into substances. One threw himself upon the man McKay
had stabbed; the other hurled upon old Polleau. The maimed son turned
and fled, howling with terror. A white woman sprang out from the
shadow, threw herself at his feet, clutched them and brought him down.
Another woman and another dropped upon him. The note of his shrieking
changed from fear to agony; then died abruptly into silence.

And now McKay could see none of the three, neither old Polleau or his
sons, for the green-clad men and the white women covered them!

McKay stood stupidly, staring at his red hands. The roar of the forest
had changed to a deep triumphal chanting. The coppice was mad with
joy. The trees had become thin phantoms etched in emerald translucent
air as they had been when first the green sorcery had enmeshed him.
And all around him wove and danced the slim, gleaming women of the
wood.

They ringed him, their song bird-sweet and shrill; jubilant. Beyond
them he saw gliding toward him the woman of the misty pillars whose
kisses had poured the sweet green fire into his veins. Her arms were
outstretched to him, her strange wide eyes were rapt on his, her white
body gleamed with the moon radiance, her red lips were parted and
smiling--a scarlet chalice filled with the promise of undreamed
ecstasies. The dancing circle, chanting, broke to let her through.

Abruptly, a horror filled McKay. Not of this fair woman, not of her
jubilant sisters--but of himself.

He had killed! And the wound the war had left in his soul, the wound
he thought had healed, had opened.

He rushed through the broken circle, thrust the shining woman aside
with his blood-stained hands and ran, weeping, toward the lake shore.
The singing ceased. He heard little cries, tender, appealing; little
cries of pity; soft voices calling on him to stop, to return. Behind
him was the sound of little racing feet, light as the fall of leaves
upon the moss.

McKay ran on. The coppice lightened, the beach was before him. He
heard the fair woman call him, felt the touch of her hand upon his
shoulder. He did not heed her. He ran across the narrow strip of
beach, thrust his boat out into the water and wading through the
shallows threw himself into it.

He lay there for a moment, sobbing; then drew himself up, caught at
the oars. He looked back at the shore now a score of feet away. At the
edge of the coppice stood the woman, staring at him with pitying, wise
eyes. Behind her clustered the white faces of her sisters, the swarthy
faces of the green-clad men.

"Come back!" the woman whispered, and held out to him slender arms.

McKay hesitated, his horror lessening in that clear, wise, pitying
gaze. He half swung the boat around. His gaze dropped upon his blood-
stained hands and again the hysteria gripped him. One thought only was
in his mind--to get far away from where Polleau's son lay with his
throat ripped open, to put the lake between that body and him.

Head bent low, McKay bowed to the oars, skimming swiftly outward. When
he looked up a curtain of mist had fallen between him and the shore.
It hid the coppice and from beyond it there came to him no sound. He
glanced behind him, back toward the inn. The mists swung there, too,
concealing it.

McKay gave silent thanks for these vaporous curtains that hid him from
both the dead and the alive. He slipped limply under the thwarts.
After a while he leaned over the side of the boat and, shuddering,
washed the blood from his hands. He scrubbed the oar blades where his
hands had left red patches. He ripped the lining out of his coat and
drenching it in the lake he cleansed his face. He took off the stained
coat, wrapped it with the lining round the anchor stone in the skiff
and sunk it in the lake. There were other stains upon his shirt; but
these he would have to let be.

For a time he rowed aimlessly, finding in the exertion a lessening of
his soul sickness. His numbed mind began to function, analyzing his
plight, planning how to meet the future--how to save him.

What ought he do? Confess that he had killed Polleau's son? What
reason could he give? Only that he had killed because the man had been
about to cut down some trees--trees that were his father's to do with
as he willed!

And if he told of the wood woman, the wood women, the shadowy shapes
of their green gallants who had helped him--who would believe?

They would think him mad--mad as he half believed himself to be.

No, none would believe him. None! Nor would confession bring back
life to him he had slain. No; he would not confess.

But stay--another thought came! Might he not be--accused? What
actually had happened to old Polleau and his other son? He had taken
it for granted that they were dead; that they had died under those
bodies white and swarthy. But had they? While the green sorcery had
meshed him he had held no doubt of this--else why the jubilance of the
little wood, the triumphant chanting of the forest?

Were they dead--Polleau and the one-eyed son? Clearly it came to him
that they had not heard as he had, had not seen as he had. To them
McKay and his enemy had been but two men battling, in a woodland
glade; nothing more than that--until the last! Until the last? Had
they seen more than that even then?

No, all that he could depend upon as real was that he had ripped out
the throat of one of old Poileau's sons. That was the one unassailable
verity. He had washed the blood of that man from his hands and his
face.

All else might have been mirage--but one thing was true. He had
murdered Polleau's son!

Remorse? He had thought that he had felt it. He knew now that he did
not; that he had no shadow of remorse for what he had done. It had
been panic that had shaken him, panic realization of the
strangenesses, reaction from the battle lust, echoes of the war. He
had been justified in that--execution. What right had those men to
destroy the little wood; to wipe wantonly its beauty away?

None! He was glad that he had killed!

At that moment McKay would gladly have turned his boat and raced away
to drink of the crimson chalice of the wood woman's lips. But the
mists were raising, He saw that he was close to the landing of the
inn.

There was no one about. Now was his time to remove the last of those
accusing stains. After that--

Quickly he drew up, fastened the skiff, slipped unseen to his room. He
locked the door, started to undress. Then sudden sleep swept over him
like a wave, drew him helplessly down into ocean depths of sleep.

A knocking at the door awakened McKay, and the innkeeper's voice
summoned him to dinner. Sleepily, he answered, and as the old man's
footsteps died away, he roused himself. His eyes fell upon his shirt
and the great stains now rusty brown. Puzzled, he stared at them for a
moment, then full memory clicked back in place.

He walked to the window. It was dusk. A wind was blowing and the trees
were singing, all the little leaves dancing; the forest hummed a
cheerful vespers. Gone was all the unease, all the inarticulate
trouble and the fear. The forest was tranquil and it was happy.

He sought the coppice through the gathering twilight. Its demoiselles
were dancing lightly in the wind, leafy hoods dipping, leafy skirts
ablow. Beside them marched the green troubadours, carefree, waving
their needled arms. Gay was the little wood, gay as when its beauty
had first drawn him to it.

McKay undressed, hid the stained shirt in his travelling trunk, bathed
and put on a fresh outfit, sauntered down to dinner. He ate
excellently. Wonder now and then crossed his mind that he felt no
regret, no sorrow even, for the man he had killed. Half he was
inclined to believe it all a dream--so little of any emotion did he
feel. He had even ceased to think of what discovery might mean.

His mind was quiet; he heard the forest chanting to him that there was
nothing he need fear; and when he sat for a time that night upon the
balcony a peace that was half an ecstasy stole in upon him from the
murmuring woods and enfolded him. Cradled by it he slept dreamlessly.

McKay did not go far from the inn that next day. The little wood
danced gaily and beckoned him, but he paid no heed. Something
whispered to wait, to keep the lake between him and it until word came
of what lay or had lain there. And the peace still was on him.

Only the old innkeeper seemed to grow uneasy as the hours went by. He
went often to the landing, scanning the further shore.

"It is strange," he said at last to McKay as the sun was dipping
behind the summits. "Polleau was to see me here today. He never breaks
his word. If he could not come he would have sent one of his sons."

McKay nodded, carelessly.

"There is another thing I do not understand," went on the old man. "I
have seen no smoke from the lodge all day. It is as though they were
not there."

"Where could they be?" asked McKay, indifferently.

"I do not know," the voice was more perturbed. "It all troubles me,
M'sieu. Polleau is hard, yes; but he is my neighbor. Perhaps an
accident--"

"They would let you know soon enough if there was anything wrong,"
McKay said.

"Perhaps, but--" the old man hesitated. "If he does not come tomorrow
and again I see no smoke I will go to him," he ended.

McKay felt a little shock run through him--tomorrow then he would
know, definitely know, what it was that had happened in the little
wood.

"I would if I were you," he said. "I'd not wait too long either. After
all--well, accidents do happen."

"Will you go with me, M'sieu," asked the old man.

"No!" whispered the warning voice within McKay. "No! Do not go!"

"Sorry," he said, aloud. "But I've some writing to do. If you should
need me send back your man. I'll come."

And all that night he slept, again dreamlessly, while the crooning
forest cradled him.

The morning passed without sign from the opposite shore. An hour after
noon he watched the old innkeeper and his man row across the lake. And
suddenly McKay's composure was shaken, his serene certainty wavered.
He unstrapped his field glasses and kept them on the pair until they
had beached the boat and entered the coppice. His heart was beating
uncomfortably, his hands felt hot and his lips dry. He scanned the
shore. How long had they been in the wood? It must have been an hour!
What were they doing there? What had they found? He looked at his
watch, incredulously. Less than fifteen minutes had passed.

Slowly the seconds ticked by. And it was all of an hour indeed before
he saw them come out upon the shore and drag their boat into the
water. McKay, throat curiously dry, a deafening pulse within his ears,
steadied himself; forced himself to stroll leisurely down to the
landing.

"Everything all right?" he called as they were near. They did not
answer; but as the skiff warped against the landing they looked up at
him and on their faces were stamped horror and a great wonder.

"They are dead, M'sieu," whispered the innkeeper. "Polleau and his two
sons--all dead!"

McKay's heart gave a great leap, a swift faintness took him.

"Dead!" he cried. "What killed them?"

"What but the trees, M'sieu?" answered the old man, and McKay thought
his gaze dwelt upon him strangely. "The trees killed them. See--we
went up the little path through the wood, and close to its end we
found it blocked by fallen trees. The flies buzzed round those trees,
M'sieu, so we searched there. They were under them, Polleau and his
sons. A fir had fallen upon Polleau and had crushed in his chest.
Another son we found beneath a fir and upturned birches. They had
broken his back, and an eye had been torn out--but that was no new
wound, the latter." He paused.

"It must have been a sudden wind," said his man. "Yet I never knew of
a wind like that must have been. There were no trees down except those
that lay upon them. And of those it was as though they had leaped out
of the ground! Yes, as though they had leaped out of the ground upon
them. Or it was as though giants had torn them out for clubs. They
were not broken--their roots were bare--"

"But the other son--Polleau had two?"--try as he might, McKay could
not keep the tremor out of his voice.

"Pierre," said the old man, and again McKay felt that strange quality
in his gaze. "He lay beneath a fir. His throat was torn out!"

"His throat torn out!" whispered McKay, His knife! The knife that had
been slipped into his hand by the shadowy shapes!

"His throat was torn out," repeated the innkeeper. "And in it still
was the broken branch that had done it. A broken branch, M'sieu,
pointed as a knife. It must have caught Pierre as the fir fell and
ripping through his throat--been broken off as the tree crashed."

McKay stood, mind whirling in wild conjecture. "You said--a broken
branch?" McKay asked through lips gone white.

"A broken branch, M'sieu," the innkeeper's eyes searched him. "It was
very plain--what it was that happened. Jacques," he turned to his man.
"Go up to the house."

He watched until the man shuffled out of sight. "Yet not all plain,
M'sieu," he spoke low to McKay. "For in Pierre's hand I found--this."

He reached into a pocket and drew out a button from which hung a strip
of cloth. Cloth and button had once been part of that blood-stained
coat which McKay had sunk within the lake; torn away no doubt when
death had struck Polleau's son!

McKay strove to speak. The old man raised his hand. Button and cloth
fell from it, into the water. A wave took it and floated it away;
another and another. They watched it silently until it had vanished.

"Tell me nothing, M'sieu," the old innkeeper turned to him, "Polleau
was hard and hard men, too, were his sons. The trees hated them. The
trees killed them. And now the trees are happy. That is all. And the--
souvenir--is gone. I have forgotten I saw it. Only M'sieu would better
also--go."

That night McKay packed. When dawn had broken he stood at his window,
looked long at the little wood. It was awakening, stirring sleepily
like drowsy delicate demoiselles. He drank in its beauty--for the last
time; waved it farewell.

McKay breakfasted well. He dropped into the driver's seat; set the
engine humming. The old innkeeper and his wife, solicitous as ever for
his welfare, bade him Godspeed. On both their faces was full
friendliness--and in the old man's eyes somewhat of puzzled awe.

His road lay through the thick forest. Soon inn and lake were far
behind him.

And singing went McKay, soft whisperings of leaves following him, glad
chanting of needled pines; the voice of the forest tender, friendly,
caressing--the forest pouring into him as farewell gift its peace, its
happiness, its strength.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia

