
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Murder Mirage
Author: Kenneth Robeson
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0604161.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: July 2006
Date most recently updated: October 2007

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Murder Mirage
Kenneth Robeson





Chapter I. MIDSUMMER SNOW

PATRICK BRENNAN, police patrolman, was the first to see the beautiful
woman of glass. Unfortunately, Patrolman Brennan did not live long
enough to report the incredible apparition. The policeman died
heroically in the discharge of duty.

The snow had been pelting down. It had started more than an hour
before the lovely, vivid woman was transformed into a horrible,
shadowy silhouette in the window of plate glass. The twin phenomena of
the snow and the ghastly shadow seemed to be wholly unrelated.

Patrolman Brennan might have told something of what really happened,
if he had survived. As it was, the policeman was left lying in the
street. His service revolver had belched death. It had taken double
toll of his attackers, but that had not been enough to save him.

Snow is not unusual in Manhattan. Blizzardfalls, such as this one, are
rare, but they happen occasionally in proper time and season. This
snowfall was remarkable. It was being recorded by the United States
weather bureau as an all-time mark in freakish weather.

It was nearly midnight when the first stinging particles whipped the
faces of the theater crowds on Broadway. Amazed voices intoned
unbelief.

"Can you imagine? A sleet storm! Of all things!"

These and kindred exclamations greeted the beginning of the storm.



IN the offices of the government weather bureau was even more
amazement than elsewhere. A gray-haired, scholarly observer divided
his time between a window and his instruments. He frequently consulted
his various graphs.

"Look at that night map," he growled. "We are directly in the area of
high pressure extending a couple of hundred miles into the Atlantic.
So it couldn't be possible!"

"Sure, that's what the map says," boomed a deep voice. "But that stuff
on the window isn't taffy candy, mister. I felt it, and I tasted it.
It's snow. You'll have to make a new map."

The speaker was an authority on maps. For his name stood among the ten
or dozen most eminent engineers in the world. The man's fists were
approximately of the size of his head. And his head was of leonine
proportions.

He was Colonel John Renwick, known to the weather bureau officials,
and to thousands of others, as "Renny." His fame as an engineer was
perhaps somewhat less than his position of note as one of the five
adventuring companions of Clark Savage, Jr., better known as the man
of bronze, Doc Savage.

"You are correct," stated a smaller man, whose face was thin and of an
unhealthy pallor. "It is undoubtedly snow. Moreover, within a short
time there will be a violent thunderstorm."

"You're crazy!" promptly declared the grayish weather observer. "How
could there be a thunderstorm? Look! The nearest area of low pressure
is south of the Carolinas! So there couldn't be an electrical storm."

The small, thin man shook his head.

"How could there be a snowstorm in midsummer?"

The thin man was Major Thomas J. Roberts, known as "Long Tom." He was
another of the companions of Doc Savage, an electrical wizard.

This was the incredible part of the snowstorm. For it was midsummer.
To be exact, it was the midnight of July 4th. In a matter of only
minutes, it would be the morning of July 5th. So, as the weather
observer had insisted, "it couldn't be snowing."

The oldest resident of Manhattan had never witnessed such a
phenomenon. As long as there had been a weather bureau there had been
no such freakish occurrence.

"Look at this," directed the grayish weather observer. "All of the
Middle West is having the worst heat wave of the summer. Boston and
all the way to Portland, Maine, show high temperatures. Right now,
Washington and Philadelphia are in the eighties!"



WHILE unbelievable, almost fantastic weather history was being
recorded in the offices of the government, downtown streets rapidly
became deserted. Shortly after midnight but little traffic moved in
the vicinity of the shopping districts. The snow had not been deep
enough actually to block motor vehicles, but summer-clad residents had
faded from the streets.

The pale headlight beams of a small car penciled into a deserted block
near an elevated railway corner. The little car was a yellow coupé of
the "for rent" variety. The driver held to almost the exact middle of
the street. As the coupé turned into the street, there was a loud,
squishy blop! Air hissed for a few seconds.

"Oh!" breathed a tense voice. "I was afraid something would happen!"

A front tire had blown out.

Street lights picked out the face of the driver. The face was small,
with features exquisitely formed. Large, luminous eyes reflected the
outside light. Slender white hands gripped the steering wheel. These
hands were inadequate to driving with a front tire flat.

The small coupé coughed over to the curb. One side bedded down where
the snow had drifted some.

"We'll have to get out here and go on quickly," said another woman,
who was seated beside the driver. "I know we were followed when we
left the airport. We should have separated then."

The fear in the woman's voice was immediately confirmed. Two other
cars were turning into the block. Both were black, closed sedans. The
curtains of both cars were tightly drawn.

The slender young woman under the wheel slid from her position. She
pushed the door open against the storm.

"We'll go different ways!" she exclaimed, breathlessly. "I'll endeavor
to catch an elevated train! Then you can slip over to the next street
and take a taxi!"

The two closed cars, one trailing the other, were moving down upon the
coupé. The young woman who had spoken reached into the little car and
snatched a satchel purse of metallic chain mesh from the seat. She
slipped and floundered with her first steps, but she gained the
sidewalk and started running.

"You go the other way then!" she cried out to her companion. "Oh,
hurry! I'll get the message to Mr. Savage! I'll wait, if you do not
get there first!"

One of the two sedans swerved past the yellow coupé. Its invisible
driver pulled the car in again close to the young woman on the
sidewalk. She had caught up her light skirts and her trim legs flashed
with silk as she ran. The clinging snow was more than ankle deep.

Four figures sprang from the sedan into the snowy street. These were
men of unusually upright stature, but they moved stiffly. Their feet
made dragging motions, as if their legs and bodies were impeded by
some heavy weight.

These men were between the young woman and the elevated stairs at the
corner. But they did not move as if they intended intercepting her.
When they sprang from the sedan, they took up a position near the
middle of the street.

The young woman's mouth was opened gaspingly. Her luminous eyes
widened with terror. She could see the faces of the four men in the
street.

"Oh! They've come!" she gasped. "I knew they'd come!"



THE faces of the four men were of the color of dull lead. Any one
observing them would have had the impression of corpses walking.
Perhaps the young woman imagined that, or it might have been something
more sinister, more appalling.

For a few yards, the four men merely kept pace with the fleeing woman.
The color in their faces was caused by masks. These were fitted snugly
over their noses and chins. They covered their necks and appeared to
be attached to the heavy material under their rough outer clothing.

These men did not display any weapons openly. Two carried peculiar-
looking instruments. These could have been an iceman's tongs, only
they had handles several feet in length. The men paced the woman with
these strange devices over their shoulders.

The young woman was nearing the stairway to the "el."

Again she cried out, as if to reassure herself, "I'll get it to Mr.
Savage--"

The black sedan from which the four men had emerged scooted suddenly
ahead. The four men edged out into the street and made way for it. The
car speared in between them and the running woman.

The young woman then was in front of the plate-glass windows of a
store. This store handled musical instruments. Its double windows were
filled with the gleam of polished silver and brass. The plate glass
was fitted in from the level of the sidewalk. The woman's shadow was
reflected on it like a fleeing ghost.

The door of the sedan next to the sidewalk, popped open. A globe twice
the size of a football rolled out. This sphere had been impelled
sharply from inside of the car. The sedan door snapped shut. The globe
struck the sidewalk pavement in several inches of snow.

The snow did not impede the progress of the spherical object. For
where the globe touched, there was instantly no snow.

The fronts of buildings, the skeleton-like structure of the "el," the
coupé and the other cars were abruptly bathed in a weird, greenish
light. The light was a warm glowing, yet it seemed to have some
substance. It was as if the air had suddenly been filled with
invisible particles.



THE second sedan had been pulled to the opposite side of the street,
some distance away. Two men sprang from this car, running as they hit
the street. These men were unmasked. Their white faces looked drawn
and desperate under visors of caps pulled low over their eyes.

The two men swung automatic pistols of heavy caliber. They seemed
intent upon reaching the four men with the dull leaden masks. But they
did not shoot. The sedan from which they had come remained standing.

The air was filled with a low, slow hissing. The rolling globe lost
the impetus it had been given. It was close to the young woman.

The woman, then in front of one of the plate-glass windows, gave forth
a scream. The cry was high-pitched, almost animal in its utter
anguish. Only death could wring such an emanation from a human throat.

There was another, lesser scream. It was like a minor echo of the
death wail. This came from the yellow coupé from which the young woman
had come. A slender figure, closely hooded and cloaked, slipped from
the little car. This was the other woman.

The glowing of the strange globe on the sidewalk was blinding in its
intensity. The two men armed with automatics skidded to a halt in the
snow. They cursed wildly and swabbed their coat sleeves across their
eyes.

The slim figure from the car crossed the sidewalk. It reached the
building front. The woman ran along the buildings, guiding herself
with one lightly touching hand. Arriving at a cross alley between
streets, she darted into it.

For a few more seconds the whole street was filled with the low, slow
hissing. The invisible particles seemed to fill the air with a minor
crackling. The fluorescent, greenish glow gave the snow an unearthly
aspect.

With the one soul-chilling scream, the young woman who was attempting
to reach the elevated, vanished from before the tall plate-glass
window. The space between this spot and the stairs of the "el" was
brightly illuminated. But the woman did not reach the steps of the
"el."

For a matter of seconds, it appeared she might have fallen in the
snow; that the fleecy downfall had buried her. But all around, the
snow was melting as if touched by sudden, fierce heat. And when the
pavement in front of the plate-glass windows was smooth and bare, the
woman was not there.

The four men in the masks of leaden color moved like automatons. The
pair with the long-handled tongs reached the sidewalk. Between them,
they trapped and nipped the globe that had come from the sedan. With
the tongs they swung it back into an opened door of the car.

All climbed in quickly. The sedan jumped away with a clashing of
gears. The driver did not appear to be an expert, but he was in a
hurry to leave. The car skidded around the corner, following the line
of "el" pillars.



PATRICK BRENNAN, the patrolman, was ringing in at a box in the next
cross avenue when the woman screamed. The patrolman's teeth had been
playing like castanets. His light, summer uniform had not been made
for a July blizzard.

Dropping the patrol box phone, Brennan whipped toward the corner.

Blinding luminance shut off the policeman's vision as if a camera
shutter had clicked. He groped with one hand around the corner
building.

Patrolman Brennan first saw the outline of the yellow coupé. He hard-
heeled toward it. His feet were hitting bare pavement. He clop-clopped
over to the little car. His vision caught the music store window. He
stared for a moment, his lower jaw dropping.

Beyond the coupé, the two men from the second sedan started running.
They held automatics. Both stumbled as if partly blinded.

"Hold it, you two!" barked Patrolman Brennan. "What's this all about?
Stop, I say!"

This was a mistake on the part of the policeman. His voice provided
the two white-faced men with a target. Their hands whipped up and the
automatics erupted with a mean ripple.

Patrolman Brennan sagged, and he coughed. One hand on the side of the
coupé prevented him from collapsing. The erupting streams from the
automatics were all that guided his aim. Though his big body was
slowly sinking, Patrolman Brennan's hand was steady.

Three jumps of the service revolver and both running men rolled into
the snow. One lay still. The body of the other jerked. Patrolman
Brennan was now on his knees. He was unable to rise, so he crawled. He
clawed his way into the street, making toward the halted, second
sedan.

The driver of this car ignored the bodies in the street. The sedan
moved away mockingly. Patrolman Brennan lifted his revolver. His
finger curled around the trigger. But his strength left him.

Scarlet fluid trickled from the policeman's lips. It stained the snow
in a circle around his head.

The yellow coupé stood alone and empty. All life had gone from the
block. The three bodies were only dark lumps. These were whitening
with the still-falling snow.

In the space where the young woman had been before the plate-glass
window of the music store was a blackened area. The pavement looked as
if a searing iron had been run over it.

The young woman's body could not be seen.

On the sidewalk in front of the music store was a queer little
collection of objects.

Directly before the plate-glass window lay a satchel purse of metallic
chain mesh. The purse had flopped open. A small caliber automatic
pistol, such as a woman might have carried for protection, had slipped
out.

A dozen bright metal buttons lay in a glittering cluster. From these
emanated the greenish glow which still lingered over the street.

A diamond ring had rolled to the edge of the curb. An expensive wrist
watch and earrings set with emeralds were close to the window of the
music store.

Of the lovely figure which the jewelry had adorned, there was no
slightest trace.



Chapter II. "CORPUS DELICTI" IN GLASS

CORDED bronze hands moved deftly among a variety of gleaming
instruments affixed to a panel of black marble. The tiny lights set in
the panel were reflected in flaky, golden eyes. The specks of light
moved in the bronze man's orbs as if they had been caught in small
whirlwinds.

Doc Savage's bronze skin over his corded neck merged with the smooth
mask of similarly tinged hair. He was so motionless in concentration
that his head gave the effect of being that of a carved statue.

"There is no doubt but what the snowstorm of itself is isolated and
purely local in the New York area," stated the bronze man. "But there
are indications possibly of other distant spots similarly affected.
She said there might be sudden weather changes."

The bronze man's words were more musing tone, rather than a statement
to the three companions then with him. For nearly an hour, he had been
studying the freakish July snowstorm. With the radio and other
instruments, he had been checking many widely separated areas of the
world.

The scientific equipment in the eighty-sixth floor headquarters of the
noted adventurer was advanced in its design. With but a touch, Doc
Savage could contact almost any latitude.

"Johnny," who never used a short word where a longer one would serve,
was busy with the radio.

"This barometric phenomenon is indubitably a solaric manifestation
beyond the scope of casual elucidation," observed the scholarly
geologist and archeologist of Doc Savage's adventurous group.

"That would be sun spots to you, Monk, if even such simple words come
within range of simian understanding," grinned "Ham," flicking some
dust from the sleeve of a suit that was the latest in summer fashions.

"Monk's" broad body nearly filled one opened window. His figure was
almost as wide as it was long. He turned and his small eyes snapped
with fire under his grizzled brows. Hair the color of rust stuck out
like clipped wires around his ears and on his neck. His hands were
covered with it. It looked like shaggy fur.

Monk's body shook with indignation. One furry hand scooped snow from
the window ledge.

"In less than a minute, one crackpot shyster will be in the market for
a new suit of dude clothes!" he squealed.

For Ham--Brigadier General Theodore Marley Brooks--one of the most
astute lawyers ever graduated from Harvard, and Monk--Lieutenant
Colonel Andrew Blodgett Mayfair, famous chemist--considered any day
misspent without the exchange of caustic insult.

Johnny continued his observations on the weather. The keen, scholarly
geologist was tall and bony to the point of emaciation. As William
Harper Littlejohn, he had occupied one of the highest chairs of
learning in a leading university. He spoke in one-syllable words only
when he was excited or the going got rough.

"She said there would be sudden weather changes," Doc Savage repeated,
glancing at the barometric reading on the black marble board.

Though the repeated statement was cryptic, none of his three
companions questioned its meaning. The bronze man would explain in due
time.

Just now, the blizzard, or snowy tempest, was at its height. Snow
swirled around Monk in the opened window. The impressive skyscraper,
with its tower thrusting into the sky, seemed to sway and rock in
gusty blasts.



THE telephone buzzed. Doc Savage swung over to the instrument. Johnny
instantly made contact with an extension. It was a device of Dr.
Savage's which would allow an instantaneous check-back on the number
calling.

But this was Renny calling from the office of the government weather
bureau. He had been sent with Long Tom by the bronze man to keep an
added check on the freakish storm. Doc Savage did not usually concern
himself with such matters as weather, but, before the beginning of the
snowstorm, he had been given reason to overlook no detail that might
be of value.

"There will be a violent electrical disturbance," announced Doc,
ending his conversation with Renny. "It is Long Tom's prediction. The
weather officials dispute it, but it coincides with my own
observations."

The bronze man took two yellow slips from the table. They were
telegraph messages. Doc studied them intently, as if he were reading
something written between the lines.

One telegram had been filed in Los Angeles. This read:

DEATH THREATENS MANY PERSONS STOP DISASTER MAY MENACE WHOLE WORLD STOP
WILL YOU HELP US STOP ON MY WAY TO SEE YOU

SATHYRA FOTHERAN

The other message had been filed in Chicago only ten hours later. This
stated:

HAVE LEARNED YOU ARE IN GRAVE DANGER STOP BEWARE VISITORS WITH DARK
SKINS STOP MUST GO TO SYRIA IN THE DESERT STOP BE ON GUARD UNTIL I
REACH YOU STOP WATCH CHANGE IN WEATHER CLOSELY

SATHYRA FOTHERAN

"Sathyra Fotheran," said Doc aloud. "That would be Lady Sathyra
Fotheran, the sister of Denton Cartheris."

Johnny eyed the telegrams intently. A quick gleam of interest showed
in his keen eyes.

"Lady Fotheran?" he said. "She could be no other, with that peculiar
cognomen. She is the sister of the revelationist of pre-dynastic
mortuary disembodiment of the ultra-civilization of the vanished
Hittites." Then he added in crude, concise English, "How I envied that
guy, Denton Cartheris. Wasn't there some question about his death,
Doc, or whether he had really died?"

"Denton Cartheris disappeared during a new trip of exploration after
his discoveries in the ancient Hittite capital," stated Doc. "But
information received by his friends indicated he believed he was going
to die and had made preparations for his demise."

Lightning suddenly stabbed across the open window. Its vividness was
that of a gigantic, slashing sword. Thunder cracked instantly with an
explosion that shook the skyscraper tower.

"And she said to watch for a change in the weather," mused Doc.
"Recent reports show unprecedented storms in upper Syria. The River
Euphrates has been twenty-three feet above all previous high-water
records."

"Blast it!" exploded Monk. "How could that be possible? We're to
believe this dame knew in Chicago this afternoon the weather was due
to go on a bust here tonight?"

"That's how it would seem," stated Doc. "At any moment, we may be
hearing more directly from Lady Fotheran."

The bronze man was not evincing occult insight. He was merely
estimating the flying time between Chicago and New York. The phone
buzzed again. Johnny swung to the extension. A woman's strained, tense
voice greeted Doc Savage.

"Mr. Savage? I'm trying to reach you--"

The woman was spilling words, as if she might have only a few left to
use.

"I'm being followed--can't tell you more--I'm--"

"Where are you?" demanded Doc Savage.

"Thirty-third Street, near the--"

The words ran into a choked gurgle. The instrument bubbled with the
woman's strangled pain. Two slapping blows came like the breaking of
dry sticks. In the bronze man's ear was only the low hum of an open
wire. The receiver at the other end had not been replaced. Doc was
convinced the cord had been suddenly ripped loose.

"Have you got the trace-back?" said Doc quickly.

"Public booth," announced Johnny, giving an address only a few blocks
away.

"Stay here, Johnny," directed Doc. "Be prepared, for you may have a
visitor. Watch out for any one with an Asiatic complexion. Monk and
Ham will come with me."



DOC SAVAGE was passing through the outer door before he had finished
speaking. He did not pause to arm himself, because he never carried a
gun. His men were equipped with the superfirers of his invention,
which were in reality, convenient automatic machine guns loaded with
mercy bullets.

Doc's special high-speed elevator dropped with the force of a leaden
plummet nearly all of the eighty-six floors.

From the elevator the three men whipped into Doc's concealed basement
garage. The roadster in which they emerged on the street within less
than a minute after the woman had been snatched from the telephone,
looked like any ordinary car.

But bullets would only drum upon its armor metal or flatten on the
bulletproof glass.

With Monk at the wheel, Doc instructed, "Take no chances. This may be
something much bigger than we can guess."

Monk was a skillful driver. The car, with its powerful supermotor,
grazed the steel of the elevated railway columns. Monk seemed able to
estimate to the fraction of an inch how much room he could allow. The
steel brushed the bronze man's clothes at times.

Monk turned off the avenue along which ran the elevated. He was
swinging around the block to reach the address of the public phone
booth traced by Johnny. This street was almost empty. There was only a
small yellow coupé standing by one pavement. Its nose was bogged down,
as if it had been wrecked.

Apparently, the woman's call had been made at about the time Patrolman
Brennan had died in the snow. The bodies had remained undiscovered.

Monk braked the roadster down. "Howlin' calamities!" he squealed.
"Them humps of snow are bodies!"



BUT Doc Savage was off the running board before the car came to a
stop. His quick hands brushed the snow from the uniform of Patrolman
Brennan. The policeman lay as he had been crawling, toward the
companions of the men who had shot him.

The bronze man saw the position of the other two dead men. He observed
the automatics still gripped in their hands.

"A brave copper," murmured Doc. "And--a couple of Whitey Jano's rats."

Monk and Ham had followed him.

"These two men are Creeper Hogan and Slim Decarro," announced Doc.
"They are two of Whitey Jano's killers. I didn't know Whitey Jano used
gunmen for ordinary jobs."

"The cop got 'em," said Monk. "Walked right into it."

"Yes," said the bronze man, "and after they shot him."

He did not explain how he knew this. He was already on his way toward
the yellow coupé. For perhaps two seconds, he remained looking at the
little car.

Apparently from nowhere came a low trilling sound. It might have been
the throaty whistle of some tropical bird. A wind through wires could
have made somewhat the same sound. Doc's lips were unmoving but the
vibrant emanation came from him. It was his sign of unusual
concentration.

Monk and Ham were beside him. Doc moved slowly along the sidewalk in
the direction of the elevated railway stairs.

"This snow," he said, moving a foot in the thin film, "has been here
only a few minutes. The first snow is gone, yet there is no heated
basement under this pavement."

The wide area in front of a music store had been blackened. The seared
section of the street showed plainly through the later snow.

Now thunder cracked and rolled. Lightning played with lurid lashing
over the tops of cloud-scraping buildings. Between these flashes, the
building fronts took on a greenish glow.

Doc halted in front of one window of the music store. Brushing aside
the new fall of snow, he picked up a woman's chain-mesh purse. His
fingers touched the cold metal of a small automatic pistol.

He held the purse and the pistol in his hands.

"The initials are S. F.," he stated, pointing to the silvered
lettering on the side of the purse. He flicked one of several cards
from a case inside the purse.

"Lady Sathyra Fotheran," he read aloud.

"Blast it!" howled Monk. "Y' mean them alley buzzards got the lady?
Lookit, Doc!"

Doc Savage already had seen what now brought a long gasp from Monk.
Monk was scooping up a pair of earrings and a costly wrist watch.

"Must have stripped the woman of her jewelry and then dropped it when
the cop started pluggin' at them," observed Ham. "Here's one of her
rings."

He had discovered the diamond ring glittering in the snow near the
curb.

"I think not," stated the Man of Bronze. "Notice the peculiar light.
It's in the snow. It's stronger in the diamond than anywhere else."

The fluorescent glow still lingered over the street. The scene was
almost like that of a brilliantly painted stage. It was as if a strong
phosphorescent substance, perhaps a special sulphide of zinc, had been
spread over everything.

Again the trilling sound filled the space around them. Only in a
moment of greatest stress did this emanate from Doc. And the man of
bronze was standing motionless. His eyes had followed the focusing
point of the strange glow in the street.

"Howlin' calamities!" squawked Monk. "Danged if I believe what I'm
seem'! Ham, do you see it? There in the window?"

"You are seeing it, Monk," stated Doc. "Rather you are seeing her."



AN "el" train had rumbled to a stop. Several persons came down the
stairway. Police sirens wailed from two directions. The first squad
car hooted into the block and the driver picked out Doc's group in
front of the music store as a point to stop.

Detective Inspector Carnahan was red-faced and choleric. Followed by
four men, he sprang out in the snow. A minute later, he was bellowing
orders.

"Ring in the block! It's Slim Decarro and Creeper Hogan of that cursed
Jano gang! They got one of the boys! There's been a mob rubout here!
Hiya--so you're here, Savage? What brought you into this, or is this
just one of them funny accidents?"

The red-faced inspector confronted the Man of Bronze.

"It wasn't any accident," said Doc, calmly.

"Then what do you know about this?" demanded Carnahan. "Who was them
Jano killers out to get? An' how did it happen they left them rats in
the street? I thought we had this rubout stuff about cleaned up."

"It wasn't a mob feud, inspector," said the bronze man quietly. "It
was the murder of a woman."

"A woman! What woman?" barked Carnahan. "Where is she?"

"Right there," pointed Doc. "In the glass of that window."

"In the glass--a murdered woman--sa-ay! You must've been eatin' nuts
this time for sure!" howled the inspector, the blood boiling his face
to the color of a beet. "Whadda you think--well, for Pete's sake!
O'Malley, Connors, come here!"

Detectives O'Malley and Connors made dry, clucking noises in their
throats. Their eyes bugged and they edged closer.

"By all the saints!" gasped one. "It's nothin' but a picture!"

It might indeed have been only a picture. If so, it was most
extraordinary shadowgraphing. In the thick plate glass, a woman
appeared to be walking. The form was more of a silhouette, black in
color. It lacked the highlights of a photograph.

But it was life-size, as if the woman's body had been flattened and
merged with the glass. One slim arm was extended upward, in the
position of warding off a blow or some threatened danger.

Inspector Carnahan rubbed his hand dubiously over the glass. The
surface was smooth, unmarred.

"Get that door open!" he rapped out. "Bust the lock or smash the
window, but get in! We'll see about this nutty stuff! Savage, you
stick around! I'll wanta talk to you!"

Carnahan seemed to be one of New York's few detective inspectors with
lack of wholesome respect for Doc Savage's reputation. It happened
this was the choleric Mr. Carnahan's first contact with the man of
bronze.

When the lock was pried loose and Carnahan himself had crawled into
the display window, the inspector discovered he had not progressed in
the least. The inside of the plate glass was as smooth as the outside.

"But sure, an' there's a woman there, an' she ain't never been in that
window before," asserted Detective O'Malley. "I was in the shop only
yesterday afternoon, buyin' my boy a mouth harp. An' the glass was as
clean as a hound's tooth!"

Inspector Carnahan was far from pacified. He again confronted Doc
Savage.

"That loony picture in the window don't mean a thing, Savage. Now why
do you think a woman was bumped off? Where is this woman? Where is the
corpus delicti?"

"You'll never need to seek farther than this window, inspector," the
man of bronze declared, solemnly. "In that glass, as plain as you'll
ever see, is your corpus delicti."



Chapter III. MEN OF DARK FACES

THE skin of Inspector Carnahan's face resembled a blown-up toy
balloon, inflated to the bursting point.

"O'Malley! Connors!" he barked. "You keep guard on that crazy window
while I get some more men! An' I'm puttin' out the alarm for Whitey
Jano! I thought that mug had dropped this strong-arm stuff an' got
himself into the upper tiers!"

Inspector Carnahan meant by that it was his belief "Whitey" Jano had
become a crook of a little higher order. His record showed he had been
brought in twice, charged with forms of extortion that savored of a
shrewd confidence game. And Whitey Jano had moved from a hangout on
the lower East Side to a luxurious penthouse in the vicinity of
Central Park.

While Inspector Carnahan was concentrating his puzzled attention on
the window of the murder shadow, Doc Savage had unobtrusively slipped
into the small yellow coupé. He was careful not to disturb the
cushions of the wide single seat.

From a small vial taken from an inner pocket, the bronze man sprinkled
a grayish chemical powder. This covered the seat from side to side.
Almost instantly, the plush of the cushions took on a curious yellow
glow. This was the nap of the thick plush slowly coming back to place
after having been compressed.

This informed Doc that two persons had occupied the small car. A small
inside plate told him the coupé was a rented car. Checking on the
owner, the man of bronze swung back to the street.

Crossing the street, Doc followed the curb to the corner by the "el."
He returned slowly along the curb in front of the music store. Now he
knew there had been two cars, besides the coupé, on the scene at the
time of the woman's murder.

Monk and Ham were still giving their attention to the window of the
shadow. Doc slipped between them.

"Stick here," he directed. "Don't let anything happen to that glass.
The police are not likely to find anything except the bodies in the
street. Stay here until the deputy medical examiner decides what to do
about the picture."



DOC'S movement away from the small crowd now collected around the
window was unobserved by Inspector Carnahan. The bronze man glided
into the nearest alleyway. His immediate goal was the public phone
booth from which the frantic voice of a woman had called. He knew the
call must have been almost coincident with the shootings and the
murder.

Just before he emerged into the adjoining street, Doc halted abruptly
in the darkness of the alley. Directly across the street was the black
mouth of the continuing alley. Across this gloomy space, some lighter
shadows had suddenly passed.

There were several figures. They could have been ghosts, judging from
the noiselessness of their movement and their color. The figures
seemed to be clothed in white sheets. Doc glimpsed the red tail-light
of a car farther in the alley.

From the vicinity of the car in the alley came the crash of
splintering glass. Half a dozen of the sheet-clad figures had
surrounded the automobile. A slender woman was pulled out and thrust
against an alley wall. What might have been a knife of huge size,
flashed in a glittering arc.

"You black devil!" shouted a heavy voice. "I'll burn you for--"

The huge knife gave off a sudden glinting light. The mouthing of the
other man ended in a wild scream of pain. Then the man yelled, "Grab
the black devil! Grab 'im, Curt! He's chopped off my hand!"

Doc traversed the short length of the alley with the speed and silence
of a jungle cat. Four men had spilled from the car from which the
woman had been pulled over to the wall. There was light enough to
glint on their guns.

The man who had screamed now had slumped to the running board of the
car. At his feet a machine gun had thumped to the bricks. The man was
holding up the bleeding stump of his arm. His right hand had been
neatly amputated above the wrist. Apparently, he had been trying to
use the machine gun.

Before Doc could decide where he was most needed, or why, another man
from the car gurgled and rolled to his back. This man's heels flapped
on the ground. He acted as if he had been partly broken in two. Doc
saw this was literally true.

A long knife had slitted across the man's stomach. The blade had been
deeply buried and ripped the rest of the way across. The man with the
huge swinging blade had aimed it at the neck of another man, who was
desperately attempting to get an automatic into action.

Doc arrived with the effect of a silently bursting storm. One cabled
bronze hand flashed out with the speed of light. The tall figure
wielding the blade somersaulted over Doc's shoulder. His weapon
clanged on the alley bricks.

The bronze man's head suddenly took the square impact of a blow. The
crashing collision with the base of his skull temporarily paralyzed
his active senses. He exerted his will to remain on his feet.

For perhaps a half minute, the man of bronze was what is commonly
known as "out on his feet." By exercising his amazing force of will
over nerves and muscles, he might have continued active. But the
bloody fight apparently was over.



TWO white men, wearing all the marks of hoodlums, were pulling one
dead man back into the car. The man with the amputated hand had
wrapped his wound with a half of his own shirt. The dark-skinned
"sheeted" men had slightly withdrawn. The tall figure Doc had hurled
over his shoulder had retrieved his hefty, murderous blade.

This man apparently was the leader. He cried out in a gobbling foreign
tongue.

"Thishahum, bism er rassoul!"

The language was the Arabic of the desert Bedouins. From tribe to
tribe in the vast burning spaces of lower Asia the tongue varied but
little. The extensive, all-embracing knowledge of Doc Savage included
nearly all of the spoken language. He identified the speech instantly.

The tall man's cry had been, "Kill, in the name of the prophet!"

A sudden voice spoke more calmly. It was in Arabic, but Doc
interpreted the meaning:

"It is enough!"

The quiet tone carried authority.

Doc remained immobile. All of this and all of his observations
transpired within the flashing passage of perhaps thirty or forty
seconds. But the man of bronze had trained himself to record and
segregate the smallest details.

The tall leader of these dark-skinned men was not a true Bedouin. All
of the white men's attackers wore the garb of the desert. Their
flowing abbas were long cloaks of camel's hair, dyed. These dropped
from their shoulders to their heels.

Their kafiehs were snowy-white headcloths that draped over their
shoulders.

But the tall leader's abba was heavily embroidered with gold thread.
Doc knew that in Syria this would have indicated the man to be the
favorite slave of a sheik of sheiks. Such slaves were much more than
ordinary. Sometimes they were warriors of fierce repute.

The great knife that had slashed off the white man's hand was a
glittering, curved scimitar. A silver scabbard swung at the man's
belt. The scimitar had a brightly jeweled handle.

Though the brief battle had resulted in one dead man and one seriously
crippled, the engagement had been almost soundless. The total elapsed
time from when Doc entered the alley until the automobile was moving
away, was probably less than two minutes.

Now Doc Savage sought for the motive of the encounter. Clearly enough,
the white men in the car had been of the hoodlum brand. It had been a
strange, mysterious battle.

There was the woman. Doc remained motionless. The woman's white face
was like a dim flower in the alley darkness. Another figure was
standing beside her. The leader of the Bedouins growled a guttural
command. The Bedouins moved swiftly, silently. Their long abbas gave
them the effect of gliding along the alley. They faded away as
soundlessly as a small company of ghosts.

The man of bronze permitted them to go. He might now have come off
well enough in an encounter against even the Arabs with their knives.
But another purpose had sprung up instantly. The woman had been left
behind with that other shadowy figure.

Doc emerged from beside the wall.

"You are the one who summoned me by telephone," the bronze man stated.
"Then you were seized and brought here. Some of this is mysterious. I
would take it those Bedouins I have permitted to depart are your
friends."



DOC'S generator flashlight flicked into his hand. Its ray was spread.
The woman outlined in the brilliant white blaze was beautiful in
statuesque fashion, only she was not tall of stature.

She had poised dignity. Her face was drained of blood, and it was pale
almost to the point of seeming transparency. Her skin was of the
texture of lovely velvet. Eyes of a deep golden hue, not unlike those
of Doc Savage, widened upon him.

"You are Mr. Savage, the Doc Savage," she said as a statement and not
an inquiry. "None could ever make a mistake, seeing you. Yes, I am the
one who telephoned. You arrived just in time."

"You say you telephoned, then you were seized," the bronze man said.
"So the Bedouins were your friends," he repeated.

"As to that, I cannot say," was the woman's surprising reply. "It is
the first time I have ever seen a Bedouin or an Arab. I mean, of
course, directly from the desert in native costume. I know as little
about all this happening just now, as you. I was seized by the men in
the car."

A man stood beside the woman. Thus far, he had said nothing. His face
was long and incredibly thin. It looked unhealthy.

The man has suffered with tropical fevers, was Doc's instant judgment.
He has lived in the jungles, or, perhaps, the desert.

"And you?" Doc pointed the two words at this man.

"Yes," said the sallow-faced man. "I happened along. I was following
the Bedouins. I have been in Syria and the men were unusual in their
native clothes in New York. Then I saw familiar faces."

"Now," suggested Doc, "neither of you has identified yourself."

"Oh, I'm sorry," came instantly from the golden-eyed woman. "I just
took it for granted that you would know. I am Sathyra Fotheran, of
course. You got my telegram?"

Doc Savage, for the moment, said nothing in reply to the woman's
statement. His flaky gold eyes caught the keen gray orbs of the
sallow-faced man. They impelled an answer to an unspoken question.

"And I am Carson Dernall," stated the man in his dry, crackling voice.
"It is a remarkable coincidence that I should be here. I was an aide to
Denton Cartheris, in Syria, before he died. This is only the second
time I have met Lady Fotheran. The first time was when I bore the news
of her brother's death. I had no idea what an amazing result would
come of my following those Bedouins."

"It is a remarkable coincidence," stated Doc Savage, without display
of emotion. "When I received the call from Lady Fotheran, I came
immediately; but I did not come at once into the street from which she
telephoned. There was a slight delay."

The man of bronze thumbed several small white cards into his hand.
They bore a name in distinctive engraving. He spread them under the
ray of the flashlight.

"Then these, I take it, would be your property, Lady Fotheran?" Doc
said.



FOR the first time, the woman displayed visible emotion. Her golden
eyes widened. The slender fingers with which she just touched the
engraved cards were exquisitely kept.

"Why, yes, yes!" she breathed. "They are mine! Oh, then you've found
Marian? She picked up my purse by mistake. We were trying to get to
your headquarters, Mr. Savage. We discovered we were being followed."

"You separated when you left the yellow coupé?"

"Yes! Yes! That was it! We decided to try and reach you by separate
ways! Marian is my secretary. She was taking the elevated train. Then
she did reach your office? Where is she?"

"What happened when you left the coupé?" parried the man of bronze.

"Why--well, there was a strange, blinding light. For a little while, I
could not see. Oh, Mr. Savage, I have much to tell you concerning
that--something I have known and--"

"Later, Lady Fotheran," interrupted Doc. "What more happened by the
coupé?"

"That is about all I can remember. There were two other cars near by,
and some men walking just before the light came. There were four men I
saw. They had dull, gray faces. Or maybe they were more the color of
lead."

"They interfered with your secretary?"

"No! No! I could not see for the sudden blindness of the light! I
think Marian ascended the steps of the elevated, but I could not be
sure. So I ran, and I used the first telephone I could find!"

"We will go to my headquarters," announced Doc. "It will be best for
us to go over into the other street and call a taxicab."

"Then Marian is there?"

"It is better we go there," Doc stated, gravely. "I fear your
secretary will not come."

"Oh! You mean she has been made a prisoner? She was taken away?"

"She has been taken away," was all Doc vouchsafed.

Carson Dernall touched shoulders with Doc, as they moved into the
adjoining street.

"I'm sure I know something of this and I can be of assistance
perhaps," Dernall remarked in a low tone.



HOURS later, the police were in possession of a severed human hand. It
had belonged to "Runt" Davis. The hand had been found in the alley.

Runt Davis was known as the first lieutenant to Whitey Jano, before
Jano had apparently dropped his strong-arm activities to become a
slick confidence man on his own.



Chapter IV. WINDOW ATTACK

DESPITE the freakish snow and the early morning hour, a crowd of
loiterers had gathered in the block. The augmented police guard kept
the crowd of the curious from the sidewalk. Six brawny policemen did
sentry duty beside the "murder picture" itself.

Among the loiterers weaved a thin-shanked, narrow-faced youth. His
eyes were beady and predatory. He moved with a shambling, furtive
gait, pausing here and there to mop the back of a dirty hand over his
twisted mouth.

The thunderstorm was beginning to break with greater fury. Lances of
lightning stabbed at the gleaming faces of skyscrapers. The snow was
changing to rain. The temperature of the crazy July night was rising.

The thin-shanked youth kept his cap pulled low over his ratty face.
One hand was held thrust inside his flapping coat. He edged in among
the loiterers directly in front of the "murder picture" window.

Aronson, proprietor of the music store, was arguing with Inspector
Carnahan.

"You can't keep the cops on my store, when it comes time for
business," complained the fat music man.

"I can keep cops on this joint until the moon turns as green as that
nutty light on everything around here!" said Inspector Carnahan.

Following Doc's instructions, Monk and Ham remained at their posts.
They had been told to watch that window. Rain started pattering down.
Streams began trickling over Ham's summer sartorial elegance. The
lawyer moved under a narrow awning. A pleased grin spread over Monk's
homely face.

"If you'd take to wearin' clothes like a man, instead of one of them
Fifth Avenue dudes, you wouldn't be mindin' a little wettin'," said
Monk.

"An' if I had a suit of monkey fur and your mug to push around with
it, I'd go back to the jungle and quit wearing any clothes," replied
Ham, with a tone of elaborate insult. "Besides, I've thought--"

Ham's pleasing observation was never finished.

"Blast it!" squeaked Monk. "Look out!"

The apelike chemist heaved his squat body sidewise and upward. A heavy
missile was flying through the air. It was a hammer with a blunt round
head and weighing several pounds. The hammer was shooting straight
toward the picture of the murdered woman in the plate glass.

Monk tried to catch the hammer. His effort failed. The weighty missile
flew onward. Heavy glass splintered and shivered in razorlike strips
to the pavement.

"C'mon!" Monk exploded. "Doc'll want to give that guy the once-over!
We'll get him!"



THE furtive youth who had been holding his hand under his coat was
getting away with the speed of a weasel.

The murder shadow of the woman had escaped destruction. While Monk had
failed in his attempt to catch the thrown hammer, his hand had
deflected its course. The weighty iron had smashed through the plate
glass of the window next to that in which the woman was pictured.

The hammer-throwing weasel put on a burst of speed. Sticking to the
alley, he crossed three streets. He entered the alley again in the
fourth block away from the music store.

Alongside a wall of smooth brick in the mouth of the alley at the
fourth street, stood a black, closed sedan. It had been parked well to
one side. Apparently this had been the goal of the hammer hurler. He
made straight for the parked sedan.

Ham and Monk rounded the wall after him, made for the car.

"Thishahum, bism er rassoul!" grated a voice.

Like Doc, his men knew many of the world's languages. Ham flashed
around defensively, his back to the wall.

"The Bedouin cry of the raid," he muttered to Monk.

"'Kill, in the name of the prophet.'"

A huge, hawk-nosed figure was leaping upon them from the sedan. The
man's giant form was cloaked in a gold-embroidered abba. A curved
scimitar like a razor-edged crescent whipped in a circle over the
man's head. Under the headcloth, his flowing kafieh, the attacker's
face was of the smoothness and color of ebony. There was the flat,
dilating nose of the Nubian.

Monk and Ham were given no time for observing details. Behind the
Nubian leader came half a dozen figures with flowing abbas and
kafiehs. But their faces were of the color of dull lead. In the gloom
of the alley, these seemed to be real faces. The masks continued into
tightly-fitting neck pieces that extended beneath the shootlike
undergarments, their gumbaz.

Monk whipped away from the wall. From a concealed pocket, he produced
two small glass capsules. He waded into the mass of figures, his huge
feet crushing the tiny glass globules.

Ham had seen his intention. He did not breathe. He knew the effect of
the capsules.

These contained a powerful anaesthetic gas, effective instantly. In a
minute it would be cleared away; but in that minute, those who
breathed it went to sleep.

The hawk-nosed Nubian suddenly waved his scimitar and its jeweled
handle flashed. Then the massive weapon fell from his hands. The black
face became vacuous. The ebony man's eyes closed and he lay down in
the dirty snow. His gold-embroidered abba was sogged with the slush.

None of the masked figures seemed affected by the gas, however. Monk
howled angrily. The big chemist flailed at the nearest men with his
fists. Ham was at his side.

But the odds were too great; they were overpowered.

Securely held by the cloth wrappings, Monk and Ham were still
conscious when they were carried to the sedan. Monk had only the lame
satisfaction of seeing the giant Nubian also carried to the car. He
had been the only one knocked out by the gas.



Chapter V. AN ANCIENT WARNING

RENNY and Long Tom shot upward in the high-speed elevator. They
ascended to the eighty-sixth floor headquarters of Doc Savage with
somewhat the manner of a released rocket.

Only in the last few yards of its upward flight did the bounding car
slow.

Lightning crackled across the windows at the end of the skyscraper
corridor. Thunder rumbled and shook the vast mass of metal and stone.

Long Tom grinned appreciatively. He had remained at the offices of the
weather bureau long enough to see his prophecy of an electrical storm
fulfilled.

As Renny started toward Doc Savage's door, the lightning ripped
brilliantly. The instant clap of thunder told the bolt had come close.
The lights in the building flicked out. Renny and Long Tom were in
darkness.

"Holy cow!" bellowed Renny. "Call off your thunderstorm! When you've
made good, what's the use in overdoing it?"

Long Tom chuckled.

"Didn't mean to make it quite so tough," he remarked, dryly.
"Seriously, I'd give something to know what's causing all this."

He was slightly behind Renny. The engineer's big hand gripped his
shoulder. The electrician winced. Renny never seemed to realize the
strength in his bone-crushing hands. Perhaps that was why his favorite
pastime was smashing tough door panels with his fists.

"Stay back!" thundered Renny. "Look! What do you suppose that is?"

The sudden Stygian gloom of the corridor had lightened. The luminance
was of a strange quality. The light was vividly blue. It seemed to be
composed of invisible particles.

Renny and Long Tom halted. They stared at the origin of the eerie
illumination. This appeared to be a spot directly in front of Doc
Savage's door. Renny started to advance.

"Wait a minute; I wouldn't touch it," advised Long Tom. "You never can
be sure what funny contrivance some one might be trying to wish onto
Doc."

The building electrician had found the fuses burned out by the
lightning. The corridor around Renny and Long Tom flooded suddenly
with light. The strange blue glow remained, but it was dimmed.

"Huh, after all, it's only a funny stone," grunted Renny. "Looks like
it might have been painted."

"I'd be careful," warned Long Tom. "Might be an explosive, or maybe
some acid."

Renny seldom heeded warnings. The giant engineer often blundered into
trouble. Usually his huge fists mowed a way out. He picked up the
curious flat stone. Nothing happened, except the blue glow was spread
over Renny's wide hands and along his arms.

Renny turned the stone over. It was worn and pitted, as if it had lain
for a long time exposed to the weather. Centuries had added up to
thousands of years since the flat stone had been cut into its present
form.

"Looks like an ancient," Renny said. "You can see where it's pitted.
Might have been ground with sand."



THE pair pushed through Doc's door. Johnny's attenuated bundle of
bones reared in the doorway leading to the library and laboratory.
Johnny had observed the approach of Renny and Long Tom before the
lights went out. He was wondering what had delayed their entrance.

"Got a puzzle for that erudite brain of yours," said Renny. "Perhaps
you can make something out of this. It's had something cut into it,
but the figures look like some kid's first lesson in geometry."

He placed the stone on the laboratory table. The scholarly Johnny
picked it up. He placed a thick-lensed monocle in his eye. This
affectation of Johnny's was really a powerful magnifying glass.

The stone was covered by rows of uneven characters. These had the
appearance of having been inscribed with some sharp tool, but the
carving had been smoothed by generations of time.

Johnny's knowledge of archaeology equaled that of the leading
scholars. Only the man of bronze himself had studied the subject more
deeply. Johnny plucked half a dozen long words from his extensive
vocabulary.

"Luminance polarized indefinitely upon an opaque infragible
substance," he pronounced, reflectively. "The characters are of the
ancient Himyarite symbolism. They have been definitely affected by
long exposure to the vagaries of atmospheric changes."

"Sure," grunted Renny. "That's what I thought. But in a few words of
one syllable, does it mean anything?"

Johnny was studying the worn symbols intently.

"Humph!" he emitted. "Unless I'm on the wrong key, this is a direct,
if peculiar, warning."

When Johnny thus descended to simple verbiage, it denoted he was
either strongly impressed or somewhat excited.

"The characters are clear enough, and they were inscribed on this
stone perhaps as long as five or six thousand years ago," he added.
"The stone undoubtedly came from the desert in the vicinity of the
River Euphrates. It's Himyarite, without doubt."

"What do they mean, if you know?" questioned Renny. "How could those
crazy figures carved thousands of years ago be a warning."

Johnny squinted more intently through his monocle.

"As nearly as I can explain," he stated, "the lines read, 'Concern
thyself with thine own business if thou would continue to live.' I
might have missed a word or two, but it sums up to the same thing."

"Holy cow!" boomed Renny. "In plain English then, it means stay out of
somebody's business or take a chance on getting bumped off?"

"An elemental interpretation, but one hundred per cent perfect,"
nodded Johnny. "This stone is an original Himyarite brought from the
Arabian desert. It is intended as a warning to Doc, and I'll venture
it is connected with those telegrams."

"I had been expecting something of that character," spoke the quiet
but penetrating voice of Doc Savage from the doorway. "Brothers, this
is Lady Sathyra Fotheran, the sister of Denton Cartheris; and Carson
Dernall, until recently the explorer's aide in Syria."

They had just arrived from the alleyway where Doc had found Lady
Sathyra.



SEEN in the bright lights of the laboratory, the face of Lady Fotheran
was even more beautiful. Her wide golden eyes seemed to reflect the
luminance.

Carson Dernall's thin countenance looked more sallow and unhealthy.
The gray eyes, however, were alert in a cold way. He exclaimed, as he
took in the multitude of scientific devices in the bronze man's
laboratory.

"I had imagined the stories of your investigations were slightly
exaggerated, Mr. Savage," said Dernall, slowly. "But I must apologize
for having had such a thought. I have never had the good fortune to
see such a complete--what is this?"

In the midst of his fulsome words, Carson Dernall paused for the
abrupt question. His cold gray eyes were fixed on the flat stone which
Johnny had replaced on the table.

"Ancient Himyarite, Mr. Dernall," said Johnny. "From the Syrian
desert, I would say."

Without touching the stone, Carson Dernall leaned closer.

"You understand the symbolism?" said Doc Savage.

"Why, yes, of course," admitted Carson Dernall. "I would interpret it
to mean 'keep out of our business if you want to live.'"

Johnny's keen eyes flickered.

"Approximately, we agree," he stated. "The carvings are subject to
various expression in English."

Dernall touched the stone with the tips of his long fingers. The
fingers were of unusual length. They gave the impression of writhing,
as they moved.

"This is indeed strange, Mr. Savage. How did the stone come here?"

"Some fellow who didn't want to hang around left it as a calling card
at the door," explained Renny.

Carson Dernall's thin face became a grave mask.

"Left at the door? Mr. Savage, knowing what I do of the desert, I fear
that stone means great danger to you! It undoubtedly was brought all
the way across the world for a definite purpose."

The little whirlpool stirred in the flaky gold eyes of the bronze man.
Though he had not appeared to do so, he had read and instantly put his
own interpretation on the symbols of the Himyarite stone. Doc did not
reply directly to Carson Dernall's statement.

"You said you identified some of the Bedu you encountered on the
street?" said the man of bronze.

Apparently, he was ignoring the flat stone. The strange blue glow
remained, as if the stone itself were alive with hidden fire.

"Yes, yes!" replied Carson Dernall. "Naturally, I was attracted when I
saw some Bedouins cloaked in the abbas. Rather a peculiar costume for
the streets of New York. I managed to get close to them as they were
entering a car. Then I followed in a taxicab."

"The Arabs came from a car and ran into the alley where I was being
held by those other men," said Lady Fotheran. "Mr. Dernall followed
them."

"Yes, yes!" agreed Dernall. "Among those Bedouins was the man I knew
in Syria as a slave. He was called Hadith. I recalled that in Syria,
where we were digging when Denton--"

Dernall caught himself. Lady Fotheran's golden eyes were deep with
sudden, inner pain.

"This Hadith, as you might have noted from his embroidered abba, had
been a first slave to a sheik. That gave him a reputation as a
warrior. He was a ruthless leader in ghrazzu, the great game of the
Bedouins in raiding other tribesmen and robbing them. Hadith was
reported to have disappeared."

"I recognized the leader with the scimitar as a Nubian of the slave
order," stated Doc Savage.

"Yes, yes!" said Dernall quickly. "And this Hadith was reported among
the Bedu as having vast evil powers. We were told a legend in Alleppo,
even before we entered the lower country of Syria. A dried-up old man,
a Kurd, swore by Allah it was true."

"And what was this legend?" inquired the man of bronze.

"SIMPLY one of the fantasies of the Syrian hills, I'd say. But the old
Kurd declared the ancestors of Hadith, the Nubian, were of a mystic
sect. The Kurd asserted they possessed the power to convert their
enemies into motionless shadows on the desert."

Doc Savage quietly picked up the glowing blue stone, inspecting it as
if absorbed in thoughts unrelated to Dernall's fabulous statement.

"Denton and myself looked upon this as one of the many wild fables of
the Bedu of the hills," said Dernall. "But it was a part of the legend
that violent changes of weather accompanied the conversion of men and
horses into shadows. It is all incredible! But this snow and the storm
tonight, together with the appearance of the Bedu, was very upsetting.
Of course, the fable of the shadows is a myth."

Peal after peal of thunder filled the rooms of Doc Savage's
headquarters. The tall skyscraper reverberated and trembled with the
smash of the electrical elements. It was as if the storm was
cannonading in mockery at Carson Dernall's doubt of the desert fable.

Johnny's quiet voice was heard.

"Of course, such a story could only be a fable," he commented.

The well-modulated, calm voice of Lady Fotheran observed.

"But it is no fable; it is all true," she said, surprisingly. "The
weather is only a part of it. There are shadows on the desert--the
shadows of men, or what had been men. And that's why I am here, Mr.
Savage. My brother, Ranyon, believes only you can solve this terrible
mystery."

"Ranyon would be your younger brother," said Doc Savage. "I knew he
was in the desert. I had some interest in perhaps learning of what he
might discover."

If Lady Fotheran was amazed at the bronze man's knowledge, she did not
betray it.

"Yes," she said. "Ranyon is following the directions in the will left
by Denton. It is a strange will, Mr. Savage. With it was a parchment
writing, it directed my younger brother to form a caravan at Wejh. He
was to choose only Harb and Juheina tribesmen, as being all that were
trust-worthy."

"You had confirmation of your brother Denton's death?" said Doc
Savage.

"Only his will, which we received," said Lady Fotheran. "It was
brought from the desert by a band of tribesmen. They came to Wejh.
Ranyon was then directed to seek a place of hitherto unknown diggings
into an ancient city in the lower hills near the River Euphrates. The
place, known as the Tasus Valley, was mapped. The spot Ranyon is
seeking was marked with care."

"This will of your brother's," said Doc Savage. "It possibly indicated
some treasure might be found?"

"No, and that is the strangest part of it. Its message, after leaving
Denton's small estate to Ranyon and myself, was 'you must seek this
place for the good of humanity'!"

"A strange will indeed," commented the man of bronze.

"And Ranyon was instructed to take advice only from one man called
Mahal, an ancient Bedawi, on where to go and how to proceed."

Lady Fotheran hesitated. An inscrutable light came into her wide
golden eyes.

"There are shadows on the desert," she said, repeating her earlier
assertion this story was not a fable. "I am desperately afraid for my
brother. Perhaps, even now, I am too late. I have no doubt but that
death threatens any one who may become interested in this place of the
Tasus Valley. I, too, have been warned."

"Holy cow!" gasped Renny.

The eyes of Johnny and Long Tom jumped with surprise.



LADY FOTHERAN had reached into the bosom of her dress. Now in her hand
lay a stone. It was a flat stone, glowing with blue, phosphorescent
fire.

"I received this just before I sent my first telegram from Los
Angeles," announced Lady Fotheran. "I could not, of course, decipher
the ancient inscription; but it seems much like the other stone."

Johnny peered closely through his magnifying monocle.

"Well, I'll be superamalgamated!" he exclaimed. "The warning is
indubiously identical!"

"Then I had this letter from my brother Ranyon," said Lady Fotheran,
extracting it from her hand bag. "In it he tells of a violent
rainstorm, strange to the desert, coming up. It was accompanied by
terrific thunderings and lightning flashes. Then a ball of fire
appeared over the tents of his camp and descended with a terrific
explosion. The tents were burned. The following day, on a rock outcrop
near his camp, he saw imprinted the shadows of mounted horsemen. On
the desert floor below were rifles, knives, saddle trappings and
bridle bits scattered about."

Lady Fotheran unfolded the letter and read aloud the concluding
passage: "I am proceeding with Mahal, a faithful old Bedouin, who has
advised me, to the place known as Tasus Valley. You must seek Doc
Savage. I have learned danger threatens you. The welfare of a hidden
city is at stake. Sudden weather changes may precede the peril. I am
going on. I have a strange feeling that Denton is alive. Perhaps I am
wrong. This may only be caused by my overwrought imagination. This
former slave, the Nubian, Hadith, may have gone to America."

Lady Fotheran's perfect hands fluttered to her face. Her golden eyes
questioned the man of bronze.

"Now that you have heard," she said, evenly, "do you still tell me
that Marian, my secretary, has been taken away?"

"She is beyond further danger," advised Doc Savage. "It is of your own
peril you must think now. Have you had the feeling your older brother
is not dead?"

"I never have believed he was dead," the calm woman announced. "I had
hoped Ranyon would find him. Now I am greatly worried. Ranyon would
never turn back. Unless he is stopped, or this murder mirage is
solved, he is going to his own death."

Doc Savage said nothing. His corded tendons flexed in his wrist and
the mighty column of his neck. One bronze hand lifted the blue stone
of the Himyarite warning. The glowing color seemed to intrigue the
giant adventurer.

"This is all too incredible to be believed!" crackled the voice of
Carson Dernall. "There must be some logical explanation."

"If there is, it will be found," announced Doc Savage.



Chapter VI. ANALYZING THE STONE

DOC SAVAGE'S bronze hands slid the glowing blue Himyarite stone of
warning into a flat, shallow-edged pan. With his sleeves rolled back,
the giant of bronze compelled admiration in the golden eyes of Lady
Fotheran.

Doc's arms were incredibly thewed. Cords lay like bundles of taut wire
under the smooth skin. As he worked there was a constant play and
rippling of the muscles.

Doc tried chemicals from several jars. One of these was a powder of
sulphide of calcium. To this, Doc added two varieties of mineral
salts.

The blue glow of the Himyarite stone turned slowly to purple. Then the
stone became vividly red. It was of the color of running blood. The
laboratory lights were reflected deep in its surface.

Lady Fotheran and Carson Dernall partly arose from their chairs. They
glanced quickly around. Doc Savage was gazing intently at the luridly
red stone. His face was a bronze mask. His firm lips were immobile.

Lady Fotheran and Dernall had been startled by a sudden musical
trilling. Yet it was not a tune. The erotic sound might have come from
the full throat of a rare bird hidden deep in the bush. It touched the
notes of the scale, but without harmonious order.

Doc's three companions knew their bronze chief had made some vital
discovery. Perhaps it would be in the chemical analysis of the ancient
stone. Or it might have been the answer to some other angle of the
problem of the murder mirage.

Doc's men did not expect to learn what had been ascertained. The man
of bronze had almost unconsciously emitted the rare trilling. He would
tell nothing until his theory had been wholly confirmed. If he has
guessed wrong, perhaps they would never learn.



WITHOUT a word, Doc whipped out of the laboratory. He picked up the
telephone in the outer room. When he had his number--that of the
commissioner of police--he spoke quickly.

"Is the store window of the murdered woman being closely guarded?"

"Is that you, Doc Savage?" came the commissioner's voice. "Well, yes.
I've just doubled the number of men over there. What do you know about
all of this, Doc? They tell me you reached the place ahead of my men."

"I know very little," Doc replied. "But I would suggest your men pick
up every person who looks like he might be an Arabian. I can't tell
you more now. Two of my men are watching the murder window and--"

"That's what you think," interrupted the commissioner. "They were
watching the window until an attempt was made to smash it. Now the
fellows you call Ham and Monk have disappeared."

Doc's voice did not betray his surprise. "What happened,
commissioner?"

"They chased after the youth who attempted the window smashing,
cornered him in an alley and were attacked by some gang. Then they
were taken away in a sedan."

"Have you arrested any one, as yet?" Doc inquired.

"Not yet, but we've got a straight lead. It's the Whitey Jano boys
we're looking for. Two of them were rubbed out the first time that
hellish green glow showed up. Then we've got the hand of Runt Davis,
Jano's right-hand man. Only Runt won't be much of a right hand for
anybody, now."

"Where did that come from?" said Doc, though he was well aware where
it had been found.

"Runt seems to have gotten careless with a chopper in an alley, and
then he forgot to take his hand with him," said the commissioner. "As
soon as we get a line on Jano, we'll start breaking the thing. Jano's
apparently moved out of that penthouse of his. But we'll have him
before the day's over."

"Thanks for the information," said Doc. "Remember about the Arabs,
commissioner. They may or may not be wearing native clothes. If you
happen to pick up one, I'd appreciate some conversation with him."

"Arab, you said?" The commissioner growled. "Now that may mean
something. We found a dead foreigner with his throat slit in Whitey
Jano's penthouse. Inspector Carnahan reported he believed him to be a
Turk or an Armenian. I'll look into that."



DOC replaced the instrument and stood for a moment thinking deeply.
The mysterious murders were becoming the most involved of any into
which he had ever been projected.

The dead man in Whitey Jano's penthouse was added proof of a killing
feud between the mobsters and the Bedouins. Apparently the Jano crowd
had been on the scenes of all the crimes. It seemed hardly credible
that Whitey Jano had suddenly taken on the role of a public protector.

Nor was it acceptable as a theory that the Bedouins, unfamiliar with
New York, had set about wiping out the Jano mob.

Doc Savage got another number. This time, his speech in the phone
could not have been heard five feet away in his rooms.

A young woman awoke and yawned. This was in a luxurious apartment in
the vicinity of Park Avenue. One beautifully fashioned arm stretched
from her night garments of lacy silk. She picked up the phone beside
her bed.

"Yes?" she intoned, sleepily.

The words in her ear erased all of her indolence. She sat up
instantly, swinging her small bare feet to the floor. The young woman
was tall, of slender but almost regal proportions. Her most striking
feature was her wealth of bronze hair.

This cascaded in a golden mass around her ears. And her eyes were of a
golden hue, possessing hidden fire.

"Well, well and well!" she exclaimed. "I'd heard you were in Malaysia,
or perhaps it was Yucatan! What weapons shall I bring?"

Doc Savage said into the telephone:

"It isn't that kind of an assignment, Pat. It's something that only
one woman could do. You happen to be that woman."

"They all begin that way," said the young woman. "I shall prepare, of
course, to be shot, burned at the stake, kidnapped or thrown into some
deep, dark river. What is it? I'm practically dressed already."

The young woman was Patricia Savage, cousin to the man of bronze. She
had always wanted to join Doc's group of adventurers. Excitement and
danger were her greatest and only loves.

Doc occasionally called upon her in cases where a woman could be of
assistance. He would not consider her as a regular companion. This
would have been too dangerous. Pat conducted a combined beauty parlor
and gymnasium in Park Avenue. With this she was highly successful.

The man of bronze was speaking rapidly into the phone. The beautiful
Pat was performing a remarkable sleight-of-hand trick. Holding the
phone, she was employing one hand to don stockings and shoes. Before
Doc had finished speaking she had made good her word. She was
practically dressed.

Then Pat replied in a bored tone, "But a chaperon, Doc? Such a sissy
kind of a job! Anyway, I shall be well armed!"

Doc said into the phone, "There is no doubt but Lady Fotheran will
insist on going to Syria. I shall permit her to accompany us only
because I believe it is safer. But just now, other things are of
greatest importance. Make careful note of what I tell you."

Pat missed none of his next words.

Then she said, "An ocean flight? I'll love that, Doc. But as a
chaperon, of all things!"

Pat Savage replaced the phone. She was an amazing young woman. Within
five minutes she was gowned and cloaked. A small but exceedingly
efficient automatic pistol reposed in her purse.

"As a chaperon," she murmured, "I wonder who I'm supposed to fight?"



DOC SAVAGE returned to the laboratory.

"I have some news which will require our attention," he stated. "I
suggest that you, Lady Fotheran, and Mr. Dernall return to your
hotels, for the present. You stop regularly at the Fortescue Hotel,
Lady Fotheran. Johnny will see that you reach there safely."

"Could I be of assistance?" said Carson Dernall. "I would like to
remain with you, Mr. Savage, until some of this mystery is solved."

"I'm grateful," stated Doc, "but I have a mission requiring personal
attention only."

The man of bronze did not divulge the disappearance of Monk and Ham.
Lady Fotheran's eyes showed her surprise that Doc should know the
hotel where she would be stopping. But she did not speak of it.

Doc had checked on the reservation before Lady Fotheran arrived.
Carson Dernall named another hotel farther downtown, where he said he
could be reached.

"I feel it incumbent upon me to join you in solving the mystery of
tonight's happenings and the desert murder mirage," declared Dernall.
"With my experience among the Bedouins, I am sure I can be valuable."

"I'm sure your experience will be valuable," agreed Doc. "You shall
hear from me."



Chapter VII. A MOB GOES BLIND

EIGHT stalwart policemen were guarding the murder shadow of the woman
in the window of the music store. Plainly enough, they did not relish
this duty.

That tall, silhouetted figure, with its one slender arm up-raised as
if to ward off death, looked too realistic to be a mere picture. After
the attempt to break the window, the eight policemen were on the
alert.

One copper inside and one outside were armed with short, ugly riot
guns. They were ready to blast enthusiastically the first suspicious
characters which might appear.

Bright brass trumpets and other musical instruments of silvery color
reflected the lights behind the unbroken plate glass. The play of this
illumination gave the murder shadow the appearance of being in motion.

"Holy cat!" grunted one red-faced copper. "That picture looks like the
dame was still alive an' trying to run away from something! I'd swear
I saw the thing move!"

The pudgy proprietor of the store was in his small office at the rear
of the display room.

"I want they should get that crazy thing out of the window," he
complained repeatedly "Would you look? Nobody's coming in here to buy
a nickel's worth, as long as the picture stays there!"

The deputy medical examiner had insisted the murder shadow must be
kept intact. A heavy conference was being held in the coroner's
office. There was no precedent for performing an autopsy on plate
glass.

In normal weather, it should have been early daylight. But all of
Manhattan was shrouded in thick fog. Black mist wrapped all of the
metropolitan area. The sun had not yet arisen far enough to dispel the
gloom.

Workers employed in various forms of labor were beginning to appear.
Though this was the morning of July 5th, many were wearing overcoats.
The midsummer blizzard had left a chill in the air.

Men passing through the streets near the music store carried tools and
lunch boxes. The policemen on guard had no means of knowing that a
score or more men with the appearance of laborers were rapidly
converging on the scene of the murder window.

These men swung along individually. Each wore an overcoat. These
swathed some to their knees.

A bread truck, with huge loaves painted on its sides, stopped in front
of a store around a corner in the next block. A box of bread was set
out. The driver of the truck apparently took time out for a sandwich
and a cup of coffee at a near-by lunch stand.

The bread truck remained standing in front of the store.

Half a dozen laborers were approaching the murder window. Each walked
alone. Three came alongside the four policemen outside the music
store. Soundlessly, but with quick effectiveness, the other three were
inside the store.

"Inside, alla you mugs!" grated a voice. "We don't want to start
burnin', but--"



SNUB-NOSED automatics flashed into the hands of the laborers. Wicked
muzzles jammed into the stomachs of the policemen before they could
defend themselves. The two armed with riot guns had pistols thrust
into their stomachs.

"Why, you dirty rat!" rapped out one of the riot-gun coppers.

"Meanin' me?" growled one of the mobsters. His snub-nosed gun crashed
across the policeman's forehead as the riot gun was lifted.

"Back into that office!" snarled a command. "All you get goin'!"

The music store proprietor rushed out. He waved his fat hands.

"Hi, you can't do anything like that! I'll--"

There was a minor crack, like the breaking of a sharp stick. A snub-
nosed automatic with a clumsy-looking silencer on its snout vomited
fire. The music store man clapped his hands over his pudgy stomach. He
groaned and coughed. Scarlet threads appeared at the corners of his
round mouth.

Then he sat down and rolled over as if very tired.

"Back into that hole in the wall!" grated a harsh command. "We mean
business and we're in a hurry!"

At least a dozen more pseudo-laborers had joined the original six. The
weapons of the eight police were stripped from them. A score of men
with hard, grim faces pushed them into the little office of the music
store.

Two of the mobsters swung submachine guns. They planted themselves in
the doorway of the office. Some mobsters patrolled the outside. Three
men moved swiftly inside of the window of the murder picture. Tools
for cutting glass appeared in their hands.

From around the corner appeared the bread truck with the loaves
painted on its sides. The driver apparently took some interest in the
action around the music store. He parked the truck directly across the
street.

A glass-cutting tool gritted into the thick plate. The mobster
wielding it started a circle around the head and upraised arm of the
death-glow phantom.

"Make it snappy!" urged a voice behind the three men. "This is the
clean-up!"

The whole building housing the music store seemed to shake.

Blows that might have been struck with a sledge hammer jarred the big
door in the rear. A thick panel splintered and a gaping hole appeared.
Through this came a man's fist. It was an extraordinary bunch of
knuckles. They would have made three or four average fists.

The lock was snapped open. The door swung inward.

Two huge figures appeared. They were beyond ordinary size. Their great
bulk caused them to whip into the store singly. Yet they moved with
such unbelievable suddenness that the mobsters failed to begin
shooting quickly enough. The score or more men had been directing
their attention upon the murder window.



THE two big men were strange apparitions. Each wore curiously
complicated goggles which covered the tip of his nose. These obscured
their features.

The hands of the goggled men flashed under their coats. One pair of
these hands moved with the speed of light. The other pair was a bit
slower and more clumsy. But in each pair appeared what might have been
mistaken for miniature fire extinguishers.

These were of some dull metal. Each had a release value and a little
wheel at the end. These wheels turned.

A dozen snakes suddenly released from a cage would have emitted the
same sound. It was a sibilant, angry hissing. One of the men at the
window yelled.

"Burn 'em! It's gas! They're cops!"

Even while their guns were jumping in their hands, the gunmen
discovered their bulky targets had faded from view. Vile oaths rang
out. The mobsters stopped shooting. They were groping about. Without
causing the slightest pain or smarting, the gas had blinded them
effectively.

This blinding gas was a new chemical. It was composed of various
sulphides combined with liquefied selenium. It was the first time
selenium had ever been successfully liquefied.



ONE of the big men swung around with his hissing tank of gas. "Into
the window," he ordered the other man. "I'll take care of the
outside."

Though the store was filled with the hubbub of shouts and oaths, the
command was spoken in an ordinary tone. One big man reached the street
doorway. The other sprang inside the display window of the murder
picture.

Holding the gas tank with one hand, the man in the window roared with
a booming voice. His free fist shot out with bone-crushing impact. The
mobsters with the glass cutters left their feet. One went crashing
through a side of plate glass into the store's entryway.

A police siren wailed in the black fog. A squad car rocketed around
the corner, brakes squealing. Almost before it had stopped, newly
arriving policemen were leaping from the doors.

When the fresh coppers hit the sidewalk, their guns were in their
hands. But they did not fire. They halted, as if invisible hands had
gripped their throats. They were in the dense opaqueness of the
blinding gas. It lay thickly about them, inert in the damp black mist.

The choleric Inspector Carnahan rolled from the car.

"What the blazes now?" he gasped, clawing at his eyes. He may have
thought for a moment the black fog was responsible for his sudden
sightlessness. Then he roared, "Now I know Doc Savage is behind some
of this crazy stuff! Feel your way over to that window!"



BOTH the big men now were at the window. The one outside whipped a
small bottle from an inner pocket. He peered intently through the
clumsy goggles. From the bottle came a yellow, sharp-smelling fluid.
It flowed through a tiny rubber-hoselike device.

The liquid from the bottle followed the grisly outline of the woman's
shadow in the glass. One big hand pushed in the center of the figure.
The whole section of the heavy plate glass bent inward.

The weight of the glass was as much as two average men could have
lifted. The big, goggled man inside caught it with ease. Then he
shifted from the display window and picked his way rapidly through the
milling mobsters.

The goggled man outside slid along the building. The black fog
swallowed him.

"Great Jehoshaphat!" bellowed Inspector Carnaham. "They've gone an'
snatched the corpus delicti! The woman's gone!"

The blinded inspector was feeling cautiously along the smooth,
razorlike edges of the window glass from which the murder shadow had
been abducted under his very nose.

In the rear of the store, a car started. The motor of this car gave
forth no loud explosions. It was a mere hissing of an engine that
could deliver super-power almost silently.

The cursing mobsters were slowly recovering their sight. One man ran
outside and whistled softly. Others followed. A low whistle replied
from across the street. The "laborers" who had attempted to snatch the
murder shadow window poured into the thoroughfare.

The rear doors of the bread truck opened. Men packed themselves into
the space. The truck started away with a clashing of gears.



Chapter VIII. FUSSEIN, THE BEDOUIN

THEIR noses were high-arched and thin as rapiers of bone. Set deep in
their skulls, beady black eyes glittered. Their skins were of the
color and texture of old copper.

When the elevator rose to the eighty-sixth floor of the impressive
skyscraper, one of the men stepped out. The other moved as if to
follow. One hand flashed under his coat. It came out bearing a pointed
knife.

The keen blade touched the throat of the elevator operator. The youth
paled, started to raise his hands, gasping, "Don't! What do you want?"

The dark-skinned man with the knife spoke in perfect English.

"You will accompany us to the quarters of this Doc Savage. Make no
outcry and you will not be harmed. You are sure no one is now in these
quarters?"

"N-no one is there," stammered the scared operator. "But I don't dare
go in there."

"You will remain with us, or your time will be short," said the dark-
skinned man. "It is the will of Allah."

The youth preceded his captor. He knew nothing whatever about this
"Allah." But the knife was persuasive.

Both dark-skinned men wore correct American evening attire. The
neatness and elegance of their clothing had caused them to pass muster
in the lower corridor of the building.

But the piercing black eyes and beaklike nose of the leading man might
well have been the features of a sheik of sheiks. These men had waited
in the shadows of the rain-filled morning until they had witnessed the
departure of Doc Savage's companions from the building.

The two Bedouins were prepared for trouble. They would have been ready
enough to kill.

Accompanied by the shaking elevator man, they halted before a door.
This bore in small bronze letters:

CLARK SAVAGE, JR.

The leading man dived hands into his pockets. A variety of instruments
were produced. The tools would have done credit to the most expert
American burglar. The sheiklike fellow tried one instrument after
another. The lock was of a pattern that resisted any ordinary means of
picking it.

Had Doc Savage been there, he would merely have raised his hands and
the door would have opened. The Bedouin knew nothing of selenium cells
and invisible electrical rays. He had never seen any kind of a lock
among the black tents of the desert.

The Bedouins talked in low voices. Their words were only gobbling
gutturals to the elevator man. They sounded sinister. The man's knees
persisted in knocking together.

The lock picker swore in Arabic over the stubborn door. He was using a
slender, curved tool. Suddenly the lock yielded. The door was swinging
open.



THE Bedouin's eyes darted about the bronze man's outer room. The black
orbs held deep suspicion. The opening of the door had puzzled him. He
was familiar with the instruments he had used. Well, perhaps the
wirelike tool was responsible. The Bedouin shrugged his skinny
shoulders.

Both visitors looked admiringly at the furnishings of Doc Savage's
office. They eyed the telephone contrivances. The complicated devices
were different from any telephones they had ever seen. They did not
know the bronze man's phones were equipped to record all calls and to
repeat all messages without the assistance of any person.

One Bedouin kept the persuasive point of his knife touching the neck
of the elevator man. The operator oozed perspiration. It ran down his
spine in a cold stream. If he got out of this alive, the young man was
firmly resolved to resign this job. This was the second time he had
had a run-in with some of Doc's peculiar visitors.

He judged the third time, if there was a third time, would be three
times and out.

The leading Bedouin crossed to the big library door. He pushed
tentatively at the chrome-steel panels. The door opened so readily
that he grunted and sprang to one side. His hand whipped to a knife
under his coat.

But the great library room was empty. The Bedouin murmured to his
companion. Interpreted, the words meant, "The All-Wise One must know."
A crafty smile came over the faces of both Bedouins.

Apparently they had great faith in this "All-Wise One."

One said, "He surely has prepared the way for us."

He spoke deep words of truth. The way had indeed been prepared, but
not as they imagined.

The Bedouins gobbled. They were speaking of "the bronze man" and great
wisdom. They were surveying the thousands of solidly shelved books. If
this Doc Savage knew the contents of one-tenth of these volumes, he
must have infinite knowledge, was their opinion.

After a thorough inspection of the library, the Bedouins moved toward
an inner door. This led to the bronze man's laboratory.



THE door opened at a touch. The leading Bedouin again whipped his hand
to the knife under his coat. The elevator man was suddenly propelled
ahead of the others. The point of the knife was sufficient without any
other order.

Though he was frightened, the elevator man gasped and almost forgot
his own predicament. He had never seen such a glittering array of
instruments. They arose mysteriously from the floor. Some reached
nearly to the ceiling.

Metal and marble boards were filled with innumerable devices and
lights.

The leading Bedouin moved his lips, as if he were praying. He was
doing just that. Here were weird marvels of mystic significance, as he
viewed them. Allah, the Prophet, was all-powerful in the desert. But
the Bedouin wasn't so sure Allah would know much about all this.

The veritable forest of machines, the chemical and scientific
contraptions plainly were awe-inspiring to the Bedouins. After all,
they were simple Arabs of the desert.

The Bedouin leader licked his tongue across his papery-thin lips. He
moved with infinite caution, careful not to touch any of the many
devices. He knew all the hardships and dangers of the Rahia, the drive
over waterless spaces; the threats of the ghrazzu, when enemy tribes
were robbed of their treasures.

Those things he understood. These things he did not.

Telling his companion to remain near the door, the leader moved
carefully down the long middle aisle of the laboratory. He acted as if
he were lost in a forest of eerie possibilities.

A square desk lay close to his right hand. The Bedouin became as
motionless as a statue. His tongue unwrapped some choice language. The
other Bedouin craned forward, staring.

Both saw the ancient, worn stone with the Himyarite symbolism. Their
gobbled words were exclamations which indicated they were familiar
with that stone. But it was not now as they had last seen it.

Both Bedouins proved by their excitement they had seen the stone when
it glowed with bright, bluish fire. Now the stone was red. It sparkled
with the vivid scarlet of running blood from a freshly made wound.

One bony, coppery hand reached forth gingerly. The Bedouin's finger
tips touched the Himyarite stone.

A shrill cry slavered from the Bedouin's lips. His hand was flung
upward by some invisible force. A strange shiver ran through his long
figure. The Bedouin's legs seemed to take on the weakness of water.
They collapsed and he fell on his face in the aisle.

None noticed what the Bedouin leader had failed to perceive. The red
Himyarite stone was enwrapped with fine copper wires. These were no
thicker than hairs. Almost invisible, they crossed the floor and
disappeared behind one of the metal switchboards.

The Bedouin's own body had closed a contact. This had given him only a
light electrical shock.



DISCOVERING himself, probably to his great surprise, to be still
alive, the floored Bedouin scrambled to his feet in bewilderment. He
gazed at his long, sinewy fingers. They were slightly marked, as if he
had touched fire.

His beady black eyes took on an evil, purposeful gleam. In the dark
orbs was fear, but the Bedouin had come into this place upon a
mission. That he would attempt to accomplish.

He was, after all, an Arab, sworn even to his life for the man he had
designated as the All-Wise One.

One hand swooped upon the red Himyarite stone. He conquered the tremor
of the slight shock and jerked the stone away, thrusting it under his
coat. The fine copper wires parted.

"Let us depart quickly!" he exclaimed in Arabic, and turned toward the
door.

The other Bedouin turned. Both stood as if rooted to the floor. The
elevator man shivered and his eyes almost popped out.

A weird blue flame, thin as a sheet, had jumped across the doorway
leading back to the library. Spears of hissing, crackling blue rippled
up and down and across the only means of egress. The flames formed a
barrier over every inch of the space.

The Bedouin with the Himyarite stone ran out of the aisle and over to
the wall. He was seeking some window. But there was none.

The Bedouin went carefully, touching nothing more. Lights went out, as
a candle might have been snuffed. But the blue flames played mockingly
across the door. Then the lights came on again.

The second Bedouin had a quick idea.

"You have the knowledge of all this," he said to the dazed elevator
man. "You will release us, or you will die!"

"No! No! What would I know about Doc Savage's gadgets?" howled the
operator.

The Bedouin pushed the point of the knife into the flesh of the
operator's neck. The young man screamed. Blood oozed and reddened the
polished blade.

"That will be quite enough of that," spoke a calm voice. "You will
remove the knife at once. He cannot aid you."



THE Bedouin stared. At the end of the long aisle stood what to them
was a giant. His body would have made the two of them in its weight.
His skin was shining bronze. His smooth hair seemed to be almost a
continuation of the golden hue of his corded neck.

Renny, Johnny and Long Tom stood beside him. Renny's big hand held a
supermachine pistol.

"With this," his voice boomed, "I can, and will, pulverize the both of
you, if that knife isn't dropped instantly!"

The Bedouins knew firearms. They had never seen a weapon just like
this one, but they were well aware it must be deadly. The knife was
released. It clanged on the floor. With a scarlet thread trickling and
staining his collar, the elevator man staggered to one side and sat
down on the floor.

Renny walked around the two Bedouins and stood between them and the
doorway of blue flame. Long Tom went over to the wall and pushed a
button. The crackling barrier vanished.

Doc Savage took a slip of paper from a pocket. He pulled the elevator
man to his feet.

"I'm sorry this happened, and you showed good nerve," he said to the
elevator man. "You can go now."

The operator found a slip of paper in his hand. He walked out, rubbing
the slight wound in his neck. His face was still chalky, but he
mustered a grin. The paper was a hundred-dollar bill.

"Put them in chairs," said the man of bronze. "Then we'll have a
little talk."

Renny and Johnny whipped the Bedouins into chairs facing the open
library door. They were within a few inches of the doorway. At a
signal from Doc, cords were whipped around the man who had taken the
Himyarite stone. Renny stood close guard over the other Bedouin.

The black eyes of the man with the stone became almost opaque. The
little whirlwinds in the flaky gold eyes of the bronze man stirred,
and he spoke.

"You will tell me who sent you here," Doc stated.

The Bedouin started. Points of flame came into his black orbs. Doc
Savage had spoken in the purest of Arabic. The Bedouin's eyes lanced
at him defiantly, but the man could not conceal his amazement.

The Arabic tongue is one of the most difficult. Never before had the
Bedouin heard any ferengi, foreigner, speak it with such fluency.
Still the Bedouin clutched the Himyarite stone under his coat. The
cords holding him to the chair had not been fastened around his arms
or feet.

"You are not the one I expected," announced Doc, still speaking in
Arabic. "But you will tell me about him."

The man of bronze was looking deep into the Bedouin's eyes. He was
employing his hypnotic power to compel an answer. But the black orbs
were unyielding. The Bedouin smiled fleetingly, mockingly. He would
not permit his will to be overcome.

"We electrocute murderers in this country," Doc advised. He had some
trouble finding an Arabic word for electrocute, but he managed to
convey his meaning. "You are a murderer. You will tell all."

The Bedouin made only one answer.

"I am in the hands of Allah."



LONG TOM pressed the button on the wall. Blue flame hissed and
crackled with a weird glowing over the man's coppery skin. A movement
of the slightest would have caused the Bedouin to touch the lethal
barrier across the doorway. The spears writhed close around his knees.
They seemed to be reaching for him.

The Bedouin's lips moved, but he said nothing aloud.

"Holy cow!" grunted Renny. "Do we really have to bump him off?"

Doc Savage shook his head and smiled.

"It is the sheer fatalism of his kind. He has determined he will die
rather than talk."

The hands of the bronze man were busy. He had been filling a small
hypodermic syringe. The plunger was held conveniently under one thumb.

The blinding mass of electrical flame was close to the Bedouin's face.
He closed his eyes, but otherwise he remained imperturbable. The high-
frequency current was a lurid wall, horribly close. The Bedouin,
knowing only the desert code, had no doubt but that he was to die
soon.

But his head was stiffly upright. As befitted a true son of Islam, he
still retained his own thoughts. His companion also remained silent,
but watching closely.

"Who sent you here?" demanded Doc. "Why are you in this country?"

The words were in Arabic, but they elicited no reply.

The Bedouin was murmuring now. The words were, "Bismillah el Rahman el
Rahhim." The prayer of the faithful Mohammedan in extreme peril. "In
the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate!"

Doc knew then the Bedouin would never talk through fear. He had
resigned himself to his fate. With him, the end had been reached. He
had failed in his mission. Though of a murderous band, he would be
faithful to the All-Wise One.

Doc's hands moved swiftly. It was hardly a touch on the Bedouin's
shoulder. But the needle of the hypo had penetrated.

The syringe contained a special truth serum which had been devised by
the man of bronze. Now, Doc's flaky gold eyes stirred with greater
force. At last they were compelling the black ones. The Bedouin stared
at him.

The Bedouin was coming under the hypnotizing influence of Doc. The
truth serum was bringing about an irresistible inertia. The serum was
effective mostly because it numbed the victim's resistance. The power
of his will was crumbling.



THE Bedouin began mumbling in Arabic. Doc's gaze held him.

Johnny was standing close. His bony figure bent over.

"He says his name is Fussein," repeated Johnny. "He's saying they came
on a black boat. Mentions some one he calls the All-Wise One--Listen,
Doc! Monk and Ham! He says the money man and the sworn man are on the
black boat! Now he's mumbling about Allah--Look out, Doc!"

The Bedouin suddenly screamed, "Bismillah, el Raizhim!

None had seen the furtive movement of the Bedouin's hand under his
coat. The ancient Himyarite stone plunked to the floor. The cry of the
man in the chair was his death scream.

Unnoticed, the Bedouin had palmed a dagger from his sleeve. He had
jerked his arm upward and pushed his body sidewise. There was a
squashy, ripping sound.

Bright red blood from the heart spouted through the Bedouin's shirt
and trickled scarlet over the hand that had held the knife. He had
thrust the blade under his coat directly up under his ribs.

The encarmined blade came out and its handle rang metallically on the
floor. The Bedouin drooped forward. He was dead.

"One of the few who ever beat Doc," muttered big Renny.

The engineer, who had been guarding the other Bedouin, forgot his
prisoner for the moment. With Johnny and Long Tom, Renny stared at the
slumped figure of the dead man. Blood still dripped on the floor.

The other Bedouin had not been secured by cords. His eyes were cold as
black ice. They resembled those of a snake about to strike. He
gathered his legs beneath him until only the toes touched the floor.
From this position, he sprang.

"I deeply regret the inadvertence of this," stated Doc, all his
attention apparently upon the corpse in the chair.

The Bedouin's figure shot toward him. A straight dagger had come from
his sleeve. The Arabs had been well equipped with spare, hidden
weapons. The broad, corded shoulders of the man of bronze afforded a
wide target that could hardly be missed.

The Bedouin hissed an Asiatic curse. The needlelike point of his
weapon struck squarely between Doc's shoulders. The dagger was driven
by all of the Bedouin's weight. Long Tom's sallow, unhealthy face
became the color of chalk.

"Doc, look out!" he exploded. "Renny! Grab him!"

Doc's head snapped forward and down. The bronze man seemed to move
only slightly. His powerful legs bent at the knees, as if he had been
mortally hit and was sagging to the floor. The Bedouin's arm quivered
with the force of the knife blow.

Doc's right hand came back over one shoulder. The tendons of his
wrist, powerful and pliant as piano wires sheathed in bronze, played
under the skin. His fingers hooked the Bedouin's neck just under the
base of the skull. The man of bronze was on one knee.

The Bedouin squawked. His cry trailed through the air. For he was
whirling over and over, like a club flipped by one end. His body
turned two complete somersaults as it flew through the library
doorway.

When the other Bedouin had knifed his own heart, Long Tom had cut off
the electrical current forming the blue-flamed barrier.

"Well, I'll be superamalgamated!" cried Johnny, hoarsely. "Doc, are
you hurt!"

Doc's hand flicked toward the Bedouin's knife on the floor. The
needlelike point had been bent as if it had struck granite. The man of
bronze shrugged his wide shoulders. There might be a slight bruise
where the knife had struck.

"Holy cow!" thundered Renny. "Just for a second, I forgot the vest!"

Doc was wearing the thin undervest of woven metal. Bullets could not
penetrate this. The force of the knife blow had been negligible.

The Bedouin rolled to his feet in the outer office. His dark face wore
a dazed expression. He stared unbelievingly at Doc Savage. But he did
not halt more than two seconds. With a curse, he twisted and pivoted
toward the corridor door.



RENNY'S bulky body was shoving through the library door. The engineer
was stopped as abruptly as if he had encountered a rigid bar of steel.
This was the bronze man's extended arm.

"Permit him to go," Doc said softly. "It fits in with my plans."

One glance at the elevator doors and the Bedouin whipped toward the
stairway at the end of the corridor. He did not care to encounter any
of the operators. The story of what had happened on the eighty-sixth
floor would have been spread by this time. The Bedouin glided down the
stairs.

"Be sure you have everything, brothers," counseled Doc Savage. "We
will give him one minute. It is a long way down by the stairways."

The man of bronze picked up the knife with which Fussein had kept his
faith with his murder chief, the All-Wise One.

"More than a hundred years are in that blade," stated Doc. "Its
harvest probably has been extensive."

The knife was a straight, thick eight-inch blade set deep in a solid
metal hilt. On one side was stamped a rough crescent, with the date of
origin and forging--"MEDINA, IN THE YEAR 1243 OF THE MOSLEM CALENDAR."
In the Christian accounting of time, that would be the year 1825. On
the other side, almost obscured by the film of blood and oil, was an
inscription.

It was the ancient battle cry of the Jehad: "THISHAHUM, BISM ER
RASSOUL!"

It was the cry heard by Doc in the alley, the same cry resounding when
Monk and Ham were taken.

"Kill in the name of the Prophet!"

Doc glided toward the high-speed elevator. His three companions
followed. They descended. Doc, Johnny and Long Tom stood in the black
fog as the Bedouin slipped into a closed car parked around a corner.

Another sedan of ordinary appearance swung to the curb. Renny was at
the wheel. He had gotten the car from the basement garage. Doc swung
to a place on the running board.



Chapter IX. CHASE THROUGH THE FOG

THE morning's black fog paralyzed motor traffic. The few venturesome
drivers abroad in the earlier hours moved their cars slowly.

In the lower harbor, ferries and tugboats hooted constantly. They
proceeded with excessive caution. Water craft not engaged on scheduled
trips remained safely at anchor or beside their wharves.

On Northern Boulevard, the highway forming the main artery of travel
along the upper North Shore of Long Island, one driver seemed to be
disregarding all the rules of safety. Persons who observed the
flashing speed of the shadowy automobile in the dense fog gasped with
profound amazement.

Twice the speeder was picked up. Once it was a motorcycle cop. After
the policeman had narrowly missed climbing the hood of a juggernaut
truck, he gave up the chase profanely. The second time it was a radio
patrol car. The driver swore vehemently when the lightless car bored
away from him with uncanny skill.

"Bet we've got those cops thinkin' we're some kind of a ghost!"
chuckled Renny, at the wheel of the apparent phantom car. "They'll
probably swear they didn't see us!"

"The report will be worse than that," suggested Long Tom. "They
couldn't miss seeing Doc outside."

The man of bronze was erect on the running board of the speeding
sedan. The wet mist of the black fog slapped in his face. Drops of
water slid off the smooth bronze hair, as if it were waterproof.

Doc and his companions were wearing curiously shaped goggles. The
lenses of these were large. The affairs looked clumsy. These were
equipped with small switches. From inside the goggles came a whirring,
as if small generators were operating.

While the headlights of the car were off, there was light. But this
was invisible to any person not wearing the bronze man's especially
contrived goggles.

Ahead of the flying car, all objects stood out distinctly in the black
fog. The highway was bathed in strange luminance. There was no color
even to the greenest of trees. Everything was etched in black and
white.

This invisible ray was supplied by an infra-red projector on the
sedan. Through the goggles, driving was made safe enough.

The further illusion of a ghost car was given by the silence of the
motor. Though possessing super-power, the engine gave forth only a
low, hissing sound. And this was the reason the swift approach of the
Doc Savage sedan was undetected by the drivers of two other cars.



THE sedan had crossed the city limits of New York. With undiminished
speed, it flashed over the low hills of Nassau County. If the black
fog had not been present, strips of the blue water of Long Island
Sound would have showed at intervals.

The two cars ahead leaped into the infra-red ray shortly after the
sedan had passed through the historic Colonial settlement of Roslyn.

The cars fleeing ahead of the sedan were using headlights. But the
drivers were compelled to hold to a speed less than half of that of
the sedan. Doc's car, a silently moving armored vehicle equipped with
bulletproof glass could neither be seen nor heard by the drivers of
the two automobiles ahead.

In one of these cars was the Bedouin who had fled from Doc's
headquarters in Manhattan. Believing he had escaped cleanly, the Arab
was doing what the bronze man had suspected he would.

He was making directly for a secluded bay of Long Island Sound where a
black boat he was looking for might logically be expected to anchor.
And it was with the hope of finding the missing Ham and Monk that the
man of bronze had deliberately permitted the Bedouin to escape.

"Kind of funny, isn't it, Doc," came the voice of Long Tom, "that
there should be two cars? There was only one when we first picked up
the Bedouin."

The man of bronze said nothing. His giant body was as motionless as if
he were a part of the car. The flaky gold eyes were concentrating on
the rear car of the fleeing pair. Both automobiles had come from
Manhattan. Undoubtedly, both had the same objective.

"It will be only a short distance down the road," stated Doc. "Watch
for their turn-off, so we don't overshoot."

"Sure, I'll--"

Renny did not finish. The sedan was running so silently that the
slightest sound could be heard. At this point, the nearest house sat
nearly half a mile distant on top of the hill to the right.

A woman's scream rippled along the black fog. It was a shrill,
piercing note. But there was neither fright nor terror in it. Rather
the cry seemed to have been uttered for the definite purpose of being
heard.

In the rear window of the nearest car ahead, two heads loomed up
starkly black and white in the infra-red ray.

"That was what I expected," said Doc, quietly. "Now step on it, Renny.
Pass both cars."

"Holy cow!" ejaculated Renny. "They've got a woman in that last car!
I'll bet they've grabbed Lady Fotheran!"



DOC said nothing. He bent his head slightly, as the sedan shot ahead.
The motor was capable of far more than a hundred miles an hour. The
fogged wind tore at the bronze man's clothing.

It was a tricky feat, passing the other two cars on the narrow
highway. Doc directed no warning be given. Renny squeezed the sedan
out on the parkway.

Two amazed drivers saw what must have seemed to be a thunderbolt
hurtling noiselessly out of the night. No horn had been sounded. No
lights had appeared. But the sedan rushed uncannily by, its fenders
grazing the bodies of the other cars.

There were four men in the rear car. Five, for on the floor in the
rear lay a bound-and-gagged man. Between two men on the rear seat sat
a woman. A dark-skinned Bedouin in American clothes clapped his hand
over the woman's mouth.

"You'll keep quiet, Lady Fotheran," he grated, "or we'll be forced to
gag you!"

The woman sat stiffly erect. She made no effort to free herself from
the throttling hand.

The driver emitted an oath. He was a white man with a crooked, evil
face.

"There ain't any guy livin' could drive without lights in this fog!
An' did you see that big mug standin' on the side? He didn't look
human!"

In the lights of the other car, the figure of Doc Savage, magnified by
the fog, looked almost supernatural.

"An' that guy ain't human," replied the man beside the driver. "If
that ain't Doc Savage, then I don't know my onions! Hey! We'd better
hold up here an' ditch the dame!"

This man was dragging a machine gun up between his knees. The car
ahead swerved between Doc's sedan and the rear car.

"If that black heathen'd only get out of the way," complained the
gunner, "I'd soon find out how human Savage is."

The bottom of the windshield was lifted. The man thrust the Tommy gun
through the aperture, holding it in readiness.

The dark-skinned man in the rear seat spoke quietly.

"You'd only be wasting bullets," he said. "Doc Savage has those big
tires filled with sponge rubber. You can't puncture them. The car is
armored."

"Hooey!" rapped the gunner. "Well, this Savage mug himself ain't full
of sponge rubber--an' he'll be full of hot lead, if that boob ever
pulls over!"

The woman in the rear seat was sitting rigidly. The dark-skinned man--
he was known as Mr. Kassan--who had displayed such surprising
knowledge of Doc Savage, had removed his gagging hand. The woman's
golden eyes were staring ahead. After her hysterical scream, she had
apparently been in a semi-coma.

But one small foot was rubbing against the other.

Suddenly the woman threw one arm across her eyes. The car was filled
with an unearthly, blinding light.

The driver swore wildly. His brakes squawled. The car left the highway
and tipped its nose into the ditch above the road.



Chapter X. BLACK MAGIC

WITH the blinding light which hurled the car into the ditch, an
astounding thing had happened. The small foot of the woman in the rear
seat had exploded, or so it seemed.

"You would insist, Lady Fotheran!" rasped the dark Mr. Kassan.

His doubled fist smashed sidewise. Had the woman been in the same
position, the beautiful face would have caught the full impact of the
blow. But she had thrown herself forward, hands gripping the back of
the front seat.

It was then the car dived and slapped over on its side, with a
splintering crash. The door on the upper side burst open. The slender
figure of the woman went through the aperture with the floating
lightness of a specter.

The man on that side was groaning and clamping his hands over his
blinded eyes. The woman's arm still was tightly held over her own
golden orbs. She ran a few yards down the highway and sprang across
the ditch. With the speed of a deer, she lost herself in the woods
above the road.

Curses and groans rolled from the wrecked car. But the four men
apparently had suffered no serious injuries. All crawled into the
highway, arose to their feet and staggered blindly. The explosion of
the chemical powder in the woman's shoe rendered them comparatively
helpless. They would be that way for several minutes.

Mr. Kassan was smart, and he remained cooler than the others.

"Our sight being lost," he said calmly, "we cannot pursue Lady
Fotheran. It would be wisest for all of us to be some other place
before Doc Savage can return. Place your hands on each other's
shoulders. Now follow me. There is a small boat concealed not far from
here. The powder will not blind us for long."

The four men filed across the road. They vanished in the brush toward
the small bay. With hands extended, touching each other, they looked
like convicts on parade.



DOC SAVAGE saw the bright light of the chemical explosion. Then the
splintering crash of the car sounded in the road behind them.

The other car was now only a few yards in the rear of Doc's armored
sedan. The glass of its windshield crashed. Almost instantly, a
machine gun began a snarling song of death. The bronze man felt the
jolt of two bullets tearing at his bulletproof vest. He swung inside
with Johnny, who was in the rear-seat.

Slugs rained on the armored body. Some flattened on the glass of the
rear window, leaving it filled with spidery cracks. Bullets nipped at
the rear tires. They were ineffective. As Mr. Kassan had seemed to
know, the tires were filled with spongy rubber. No shots could deflate
them.

"We must return," stated Doc. "Let them have it, Renny."

Renny reached to the instrument board and twisted a knob. He pulled
this out. The headlights of the pursuing car were immediately
submerged in what seemed to be a spreading cloud.

The chemical smoke screen was one of the many devices of Doc Savage.
It was made more effective by being composed of gummy particles, which
adhered to the glass of the following headlights. In a few seconds,
these were completely obscured.

The machine gun still racketed. Slugs screamed from the concrete, but
they were whining with wildness. Brakes squealed and Doc knew the
car's driver had been forced to pull up.

"Turn around the first place you can, and we'll go back," said the man
of bronze, at the same time slipping out and dropping lightly into the
highway.



DOC passed into the opaque chemical fog of his own creation. Here he
whipped the clumsy infra-red-ray goggles from his eyes. His vision was
several times as keen as that of the average man, but in this screen
he could see nothing.

Nevertheless, he ran with amazing speed. He was more anxious to reach
the car that had been wrecked than the nearer one carrying the Bedouin
he had permitted to escape that he might trail him. But when he almost
collided with the first car, it was stopped in the middle of the
highway.

Doc would have passed on silently, but the screen-shrouded car had a
strange aspect. Though bullets had poured from it only the minute or
two before, no one seemed to be in the closed, black auto. Doc
listened intently, then started on.

He reached the other car, lying on its side in the ditch. A gurgling
moan came from inside the car. The man of bronze halted, flexing his
cabled muscles. His extraordinary ears picked out all sounds and
classified them. Only one man was in the car. Doc could have heard
them breathing, if there had been more than one.

The man in the car emitted a choking, coughing gurgle. He was
straining to rise from the floor of the car.

"Help! Help!" he sputtered. It sounded like "oolp! oolp!" through the
tape across his lips. The man was apparently trying to feel his way
out of the car. He was using his chin for this purpose, his wrists
being bound behind his back. Tape cut off his sight.

Doc pulled the man to his feet. He loosened the cords on the man's
wrists and let him pull the tape from his own eyes and mouth. The man
of bronze picked up a piece of the tape that fell to the floor of the
car. He rubbed it between his fingers.

"Doc Savage!" exclaimed the man, as soon as he had cleared one eye. "I
hoped it would be you! I'd just about given up hope of getting out of
this, when the car turned over. Where have those Bedouins gone?"

"I did not see them leave," stated Doc. "Apparently, they were in a
hurry. What happened?"

The man groaning over the agony of the loosening tape was Carson
Dernall. His pallid face was whiter than usual.



"I RECEIVED a telephone message at my hotel saying Lady Fotheran was
in trouble," said Dernall. "I started out to go to her hotel and two
men put guns in my back as I came out on the street. They pushed me
into a car. Then one hit me over the head. That's all I know until I
came to my senses on the floor and we were traveling.

"A few minutes ago, I heard the driver swearing. That must have been
when you passed. Then the shooting started. Suddenly the car was
wrecked. All of the men piled out and they must have run away."

Doc Savage nodded and said nothing. He was moving back along the
highway. Dernall followed closely, glancing furtively around as if he
feared his captors would return. Renny had found a wide spot in a
driveway and was coming back.

Suddenly, from Doc came the exotic trilling sound. Its rare tuneless
music filled the black fog for considerable space. Immediately, there
was a rustling noise in the bushes above the highway. Doc's flashlight
beam picked out a face that was attractive, though now it was
scratched and liberally smeared with dirt.

A woman came limping into the highway. She was wearing only one whole
shoe. A portion of the other one hung in tatters by its ankle strap.

"Listen, Doc," said the woman coolly, "the next time you put a torpedo
in my heel, you'll know it. I thought you said that stuff wouldn't
hurt anybody but the other fellow, if I'd keep my arm over my eyes."

Doc's handsome features broke in a quiet smile.

"I did not advise you to explode the chemical while it was still in
the heel of your shoe," he stated.

"Well, I hadn't any chance to get it out, so I set it off and took a
chance," said the woman. "And this was supposed to be a quiet little
job of playing chaperon. Anyway, I shot a man."

Patricia Savage sat down on the running board of the wrecked car and
nursed her scorched foot. Her bronze hair had lost the smooth
appearance that had helped make her so strongly resemble Lady
Fotheran. It tumbled in a golden cascade over her ears. She smiled up
at Doc.

"Now what do we play?" she inquired, impudently. "And will it be all
right if I take off the other shoe?"

"I'll send you home, the first car comes along," said Doc. "We are
facing a serious situation. We must find the black boat before the men
from the cars reach there, or Ham and Monk may suffer."

"I'm not going home in the first car or any other car," asserted Pat.
"I'm wrapping up my foot, and I'm going with you!"

"Well, I'll be superamalgamated!" snorted Johnny. "In that nightgown?"

Pat tossed her head defiantly. She was clad in a lacy negligee, in
which she had been carried from Lady Fotheran's hotel. Doc had
suspected an attack on Lacy Fotheran, and had Pat make up to look like
the titled English woman and substitute for her at her hotel.



Chapter XI. WHEN THE BAY BURNED

WHITEY Jano annoyed others by juggling popcorn into his mouth and
crunching it. This had Runt Davis walking wildly up and down, mouthing
oaths.

"This is beginning to look like a lousy double-cross to me!" howled
Runt Davis, to make himself heard above the crunch-crunch of Whitey
Jano's slow, heavy jaws. "Lookit what I get! An' now you're sayin' you
don't know whether it's worth playin' across! Who's payin' me for this
flipper? That's what I wanta know!"

Runt waved the bandaged stump where his right hand had been. His
bullet head jerked up and down on his long neck.

Whitey Jano spoke with unctuous oiliness in his tone.

"Ever hear the quotation 'an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth'?" he remarked, cheerfully. "You can't expect to shave off a
couple of ears and not pay up. Hadith is an unusually smart fellow."

Runt whipped himself over in front of Whitey. Whitey juggled some more
popcorn into his mouth. The white hair that gave him his name was
snowy. His dark features were fattish and globular. His deep, black
eyes seemed constantly filled with gloom. He might well have been some
Asiatic monk, or perhaps the priest of an ancient temple.

Whitey's asset was his benevolent aspect. He looked upon the excited
Runt with a fatherly eye. Runt was enraged.

"I'm tellin' yuh this mix-up ain't comin' out for you!" he raved. "The
boys don't get this! We're goin' along sweet, an' then along come
these black heathen an' go to work for you! Or maybe you're workin'
for them! Twice they've busted into the rest of us! We're told to
snatch this Fotheran dame, an' along comes Hadith!"

"He was only following instructions," said Whitey, gently. "We changed
our minds. We learned she had already reached Doc Savage. We followed
the wisest course in having her freed for the time. Doc Savage was
right on the spot. It's all we could do."

"An' I suppose this black Hadith was told to start choppin', an'
that's why Tulary was bumped off?" snapped Runt. "All I'm askin' is
one good crack at this heathen! This time, it won't be his ears!"

Whitey crunched loudly on his popcorn for a minute.

"You shave off Hadith's ears without asking questions when you size
him up as spying on the penthouse, when he was there by our orders,"
said Whitey, patiently. "Probably you thought that was funny. And some
of you playful fellows stuck a knife in another one. Perhaps you're
not aware you have caused Hadith to lose face when he returns to the
desert."

"He'll not have any face and he'll never get back where he come from!"
screeched Runt, his head bobbing like a curious turtle catching flies.
"First, you tell us the boys will be in on one of the biggest splits
ever come off, an' then right in the middle of it you ring in this
bunch of camel herders. Them shadow bump-offs has got us all headed
for the seat!"

Whitey flipped a snowy grain of popcorn into the air. He caught it
between his teeth and crunched.

"You are surprisingly astute, Runt, my boy. All of you are headed for
the hot seat, if you're caught. That's why you're calling it all even
with Hadith and forgetting. You're coming along and like it. Stick
around the big town and they be slitting your pants legs upriver
before you know it."

"I'm not calling off anything with that black heathen!" shouted Runt.
"The minute I put eyes on him, I'm turnin' on the heat!"

"Then put your eyes behind you, Runt, my boy," suggested Whitey
between crunches. "And if you're wise, you'll hang on to the one hand
you've got."



THE tall figure of the Nubian-faced Hadith had appeared behind Runt.
The ebony face was a stony black mask. The eyes of the former slave to
a sheik of sheiks were red-rimmed and burning with murderous hate.

The heavy, curved scimitar with the jeweled handle swished slowly back
and forth. But it was not Hadith who had brought the scream of utter
horror into Runt's constricting throat.

Beside Hadith were ranged six other figures. Their faces were the
color of leaden corpses. Two carried pronglike instruments resembling
iceman's tongs with long handles. Two others swung a carved wooden
cradlelike affair between them. Inside the cradle something like a
ball rolled and thumped against the ends.

Hadith voiced a direct question in Arabic. It consisted of only three
short words. They meant, "Shall it be?"

"No! Not that way, chief! Any other way!"

Whitey Jano casually tossed popcorn into his round mouth. He crunched
it slowly. He spoke. Runt's little eyes popped more, if that were
possible.

Jano had spoken in Arabic. Runt hadn't known his chief spoke the
language. The words were sharp. The black Hadith dropped swiftly to
one knee in an obeisance. Runt observed this submission in terrified
bewilderment. Hadith signaled to the masked figures. They faded from
the long room.

"Runt, my boy," spoke Whitey Jano, in a soothing, kindly voice, "you
and the others are much wanted by the police. By some error, it seems
the members of the mob are the only suspects in these deaths of the
shadows."

"Maybe it was a mistake," mumbled Runt. "But they was funny mistakes."

Jano's jaws crunched slowly.

"We will call them mistakes," he said, unctuously. "Still, you and the
others will benefit greatly by accompanying us. Matters have suddenly
reached a crisis. Within an hour possibly, we shall be departing. You
will get a square deal in the land over there, I will see to that."

Runt Davis slumped into a chair, nursing his bloody arm.

"We'll have to depend on that, chief," he said, and his long neck was
rigid. "I'm not fooled. We've been made too hot to stay here. It
wasn't any mistake."

The long room swayed rhythmically. Water slapped and sighed away in
long, running swells outside. The long room was the luxuriously fitted
cabin of a long yacht that looked like it had speed. It was painted
black.

Whitey Jano flipped popcorn into the air. His jaws crunched in time
with the little slapping waves that rode the swells.

"Sounds like a monkey cracking peanuts," suggested a biting, sarcastic
voice in a small stateroom at the end of the yacht cabin.

"Blast it!" squealed another voice. "This ain't any time to be funny!
Anyway, you eat the same way! You'd think it was a pig gnawin' a ear
of corn!"



ANY one acquainted with Doc Savage's adventurers would have instantly
identified the voice of Monk and Ham. Even in the face of greatest
danger, this pair maintained their verbal feud. Somehow, their morale
was higher when they were thus slapping at each other.

Ham did not reply to Monk. But the apish chemist howled in his
strangely childlike voice.

"Ouch! You dag-goned shyster! You do that again an' I'll ram my foot
right through where you put your grub!"

Ham grinned. It was a ghastly sort of grin on his sharp features. For
the lawyer's astute countenance was caked with mud and filth from the
alley in which he and Monk had been captured. Only the night before,
his sartorial perfection would have dazzled Broadway. Now the latest
in natty summer attire looked ready for the rag man.

Ham had produced the yell from Monk by the simple method of jerking
his thumb. The movement hurt Ham as much as it did Monk, but he had
expected it. However, he did not jerk again. It threatened to sever
his thumb.

Monk's little eyes glared at Ham. They were facing each other. They
had been compelled to do that for several hours. Also, they had been
sitting flat on the floor of the yacht's stateroom, with Monk's short
legs projecting alongside Ham's longer shanks. They could not move
from that position.

"Dangit all!" moaned Monk. "How much longer do you suppose this is
going to keep up?"

Before Ham could reply, Whitey Jano's benevolent voice spoke again.

"As soon as we get the word, we will dispose of those two," he said.
"We shall not leave any traces for Doc Savage to discover. We cannot
leave shadows on water."

Monk shivered involuntarily. His long arms convulsed as if he intended
leaping into action. This time, it was Ham who howled.

"You offshoot of a gorilla! Don't do that! Keep those hairy thumbs
quiet!"

MONK grunted in a pleased manner. But torturing Ham wasn't giving him
a great deal of pleasure.

The furry, stubby thumbs of Monk were locked to the thumbs of Ham.
They were attached by the torturing contrivances known to the police
as thumbcuffs. These are employed sometimes in place of handcuffs in
the cases of extremely dangerous criminals.

The cuffs are fashioned in the manner of handcuffs. But they are small
and will lock two thumbs together. Inside each cuff are sharp saw-
edged teeth. Any pull against the links tightens these teeth. They
sink into the flesh. A prisoner would have to strip off all of the
flesh from the bones to tear himself free. Then probably he would have
to shave off a part of the bones.

The feet of Monk and Ham were free. But this did not give them a
chance to move around. Their captors had made certain they would stay
in one spot by a very simple device. They were sitting on the floor
facing each other.

And inside their arms, projecting from the floor to the ceiling of the
stateroom was an iron column. If his giant hands had been free, the
prodigious strength of the gorilla-like Monk might have wrenched the
iron stanchion from its place. But with his thumbs locked to Ham's,
the chemist was helpless as a baby.

"Monk," said Ham. "Did you get what that oily devil said?"

"Blast it! I don't care what he said! Wait till I get loose from these
danged things! I'm goin' to build a fire under that guy that'll melt
him into grease!"

"He said they couldn't leave any shadows on water," mused Ham. "I was
thinking about that shadow on the window."

"You dag-goned nut-brained mouth-piece!" squealed Monk. "Why'd you
hafta go an' think up something like that! I wonder if Doc has got any
line on all this crazy stuff?"

"It's been three or four hours now," said Ham. "Doc usually works
fast. Maybe they've got him, too."

"Dag-gonit! You would think of that!"

They heard some more of Whitey Jano's men enter the cabin. A thin
voice complained.

"But Whitey, you ain't expectin' us to go places on them crazy camels?
I tried ridin' a camel in a circus once, when I was a kid. I ain't
havin' any more of it."

Between crunching jaws, Whitey Jano said soothingly, "You'll ride
camels and like it. Take my word for it, Birdlegs, this is the biggest
split any crowd of nice boys ever had a chance at. There'll be
millions for everybody, and if you don't want to come back where the
hot seat's waiting for you, all of you can be big stuff."

"Yeah?" sneered the one called "Birdlegs." "An' the bigger you are,
the quicker some of them black devils'll be puttin' a knife between
your slats. I don't like it."

"I take it," said Ham to Monk, "Whitey's boys are about to take a sea
voyage for their health. And I'll bet they won't be comin' back. It
strikes me this Whitey has picked up better Arabian than you'd expect
a big-shot crook over here to know."

"What's the difference?" groaned Monk. "They may be going on a voyage
for their health, but we're ticketed for a different kind of a ride."



IN the cabin was a sudden commotion. A new man had arrived. He spoke
rapidly in Arabic. Ham picked out some of the words and pieced them
together. Like others of Doc Savage's group, the lawyer could speak in
almost any of the known languages. In fact, all of the group employed
an ancient Mayan tongue to communicate with each other in the presence
of enemies.

"Something's happened," Ham told Monk. "And Doc's got a line on us.
The fellow who just came in delivered an order from somebody he called
the All-Wise One. We're to be taken on that sea voyage. He says the
All-Wise One can use a chemist for a while. Monk, you do have your
uses at times."

"Howlin' calamities! What good'll I be on a sea voyage, if I ain't got
no thumbs!"

Ham's astute brain had been doing some fast conjecturing.

"I think I get the line-up, Monk. Whitey Jano somehow started a feud
between the Bedouins and the gunmen he had working for him. He's got
the gunmen so jammed with the police they have to lam out of New York.
When they've finished the job, whatever it is, on the other side,
it'll be just too bad for them."

"Then who's this All-Wise One?" questioned Monk.

"I'd say that's the leader of the Bedouins," advised Ham. "And they're
responsible for the shadow death, or whatever it is. I only hope Doc
gets here. Listen! Hear that, Monk?"

The sound that had startled Ham did not pertain to Doc Savage. The
clear, thin wail of a police siren shrilled across the bay. It came
from the direction of Long Island Sound.

"That's a police boat!" exclaimed Ham. "Maybe it means our finish, but
the cops have got a line on Whitey Jano!"

The same opinion prevailed inside the yacht's cabin. For the first
time, Whitey Jano ceased crunching popcorn to listen. The piping voice
of Runt Davis broke out.

"So we've gotta lam, huh? Too bad, chief, but it looks like you made
another mistake--and this time it's a real one!"

The ebony face of Hadith floated through the cabin doorway. The
outside wind stirred his kafieh. The blowing aside of the headcloth
revealed a ghastly truth. Both of the Nubian's ears had been sheared
off close to his head. In their places were unhealed, hideous wounds.

Hadith halted inside, waiting impassively. The siren of the police
boat wailed louder. Undoubtedly, the harbor craft was making directly
for the secluded bay.



MONK and Ham pulled themselves painfully to their feet. Standing, they
could see through the stateroom window. The black fog lay thick around
the yacht.

"Look at that, Monk," directed Ham. "The masked devils again!"

Into the lights on the deck a number of tall figures moved stiffly.
Their dull, leaden faces under the eerie fog lights gave them the
appearance of dead men walking.

Two of the masked figures carried a wooden, cradlelike box between
them. They had attached a light, thin cable to something inside the
box. These men crouched in the shadows of the deck on the side which
the police boat was rapidly approaching.

A searchlight beam knifed from the bay. The water police aimed the
light at the black yacht. The beam rose and fell like a ghostly
finger, as the police boat lifted on the swells from the Sound. The
sea had been stirred by the inexplicable storms of the night.

"Howlin' calamities!" squealed Monk. "They turned on the yacht lights
to bring the cops! It's a trap!"

"You're correct," said Ham. "They're deliberately planning to trap
that boat and murder its occupants. We've got to warn them."

The police boat glided closer. Its motor was cut down and ran with a
hissing sound.

"Now," said Ham. "Put that monkey voice of yours into the best yell
you've got."

Monk didn't take time to reply. He put all the power of his lungs
behind a screaming childish treble. Ham joined in with his own sharp,
piercing voice.

"Keep off! Keep off!" Monk and Ham shouted in unison. "It's a trap!
Keep off!"

The door of the stateroom slapped open. Monk and Ham, still yelling in
desperate cadence to warn the police, were helpless. Their tortured
thumbs held them to the iron stanchion. Whitey Jano's men ripped out
the vilest of oaths.

Reversed automatics were lifted. They crashed with skull-cracking
force on the heads of their helpless prisoners. Monk and Ham fell to
the floor. The devilish teeth of the thumb-cuffs gouged into the
flesh. Scarlet fluid oozed over their hands. But neither prisoner saw
this, nor felt what would have been searing pain.

They were unconscious. The cabin door closed behind the cursing
mobsters. A bolt grated in the lock.



FOUR harbor policemen in the boat had heard the cries of warning.
Unfortunately, they misinterpreted them.

"They're makin' a play for a getaway!" barked the sergeant in command
of the boat. "Turn the machine gun on them and start shooting, if
anything happens!"

He held the boat on a steady, gliding course toward the side of the
black yacht. The four water coppers did not see the globe lowered to
the surface of the water. It was the size of two footballs. Swung to
the end of a light cable, the globe was between the police boat and
the side of the black yacht.

Without sound a greenish, weird fire spread fanwise over the bay. The
air became filled with what seemed to be material particles that were
invisible. All of the men aboard the yacht, with the exception of the
masked figures, had crowded into the cabin.

The motor of the police boat suddenly roared. The machine gun
stuttered in one short blast and died out. The fast police boat did
not pause. Its increased speed shot it across the bow of the black
yacht.

One of the fog-piercing beams bathed it briefly against the spreading
greenish glow. The light played over the police boat from stem to
stern. It showed nothing but a boat, an empty, high-powered boat
dashing through the mixture of greenish glow and black fog toward the
rocks on the shore. The rocks were less than a hundred yards away.

The police boat mushroomed itself on the first jagged reef. Its speed
caused it to completely hurdle the fangs that tore out its bottom. The
boat turned over, crashed, and lay on its side among the rocks farther
inshore. It was high and dry.

The globe emitting the greenish, horrible glowing swung at the end of
the thin cable. It was being drawn up. The cable slipped off. The
murder sphere plunged into the water. There was no hissing. Only the
splash.



ALMOST instantly, the whole bay seemed to explode into waves and
ripples of flame. Phosphorescent blaze rolled over the long swells.
Each ripple was converted into a running finger of green fire. But
there was no heat. The flame was cold.

The waves ran along and broke with blazing fury along the shore. The
black yacht was converted into a glowing ghost ship. The anchor lifted
and powerful motors throbbed. The yacht glided swiftly across the
blazing bay and headed into the black fog of Long Island Sound.

Behind the vessel, the secluded harbor retained its brilliant,
blinding glow.

Within a few minutes after the black yacht had vanished, the armored
sedan of Doc Savage jolted at high speed along the rough road leading
to the hidden landing. The glow of the murder globe had given the
first definite direction of the black yacht.

The bay still retained the appearance of a lake of liquid fire. As the
sedan halted, the man of bronze leaped from the running board. He
seemed hardly to touch the ground, as he leaped over the rocks.

Wedged high in the rocks, he saw a shattered police boat. Apparently
there had been four men in the boat. The guns, other metal objects and
the buttons of the uniforms indicated this.

There were strange marks on one side of the wrecked boat. They were
the shadow pictures of legs. The legs of policemen who had stood
braced and ready to shoot down men they believed to be ruthless and
bloodless murderers.



Chapter XII. THE BLACK YACHT SINKS

DOC SAVAGE closed the telephone connection in his outer office. He sat
for one minute gazing thoughtfully at the chrome-steel door behind
which lay his library. Grouped within the library were Long Tom,
Renny, Johnny, Patricia Savage and Carson Dernall.

The man of bronze was making a rapid mental check of his own. Though
he was alone, the rare, exotic trilling came from his motionless
figure. This did not seem to be fashioned by his lips. It was almost
as if the keenly analytical brain itself were giving forth the sound.

This indicated that Doc Savage was deeply stirred. Perhaps he had come
upon a startling discovery. For nearly half an hour he had been
talking over long-distance telephone to various places. Some of the
calls had been across the Atlantic. The man of bronze had conversed
with persons in England.

He opened the library door and announced, "Brothers, we are leaving at
once."

Patricia Savage frowned at her giant cousin. She was one of the few
persons who ever questioned Doc's decisions. Mostly only women ever
did that. Doc himself admitted he could not understand women.
Moreover, he did not trouble himself about it.

"But you'll have to wait, Doc," said Pat. Her frown only succeeded in
making her face more attractive. "I'll have to pack some clothes."

"We are leaving at once," repeated Doc, quietly. "You will find
everything you require in the dirigible. I have been prepared for such
an emergency, should it arise."

"You think of everything, don't you, Doc?" said Pat with an impudent
smile. "I suppose you had expected some time to snatch me out of my
sleep for a dash to the Arctic."

Doc smiled and said nothing. His charming cousin indeed seemed
unprepared at the moment for a flight over the Atlantic. The negligee
she had been wearing had suffered in the brush. Her face was gouged by
thorns and was still somewhat dirty.

Pat had robed herself in one of Johnny's coats. Johnny was thin as a
skeleton and tall. The garment fell to Pat's small feet. She was
lacking one shoe.

"We are ready and we have no time to lose," stated Doc. "I have
learned the black yacht headed southward from the lower harbor."

The pallid Carson Dernall seemed to have partly recovered from his
experience. He spoke now.

"You will take me with you, Mr. Savage?"

The man of bronze studied the pale, fever-ravished face. The man
undoubtedly was sincere in wanting to become one of the party.

"Possibly we shall encounter some great dangers," Doc suggested.

"I have no doubt but you will," agreed Carson Dernall. "But I am
familiar with the region of the Syrian desert. Perhaps my knowledge
will be of value. That, however, is not my thought. Denton Cartheris
was my closest friend."

Doc merely inclined his head in agreement.

"Let us go," he said. "The fog has broken. It is my hope to overhaul
the black yacht. I believe Monk and Ham are still alive."

Pat shrugged inside Johnny's long coat.

"For once, you have forgotten something, Doc," she smiled. "I am
supposed to be a chaperon, am I not? Yet you had said nothing about
Lady Fotheran."

"Lady Fotheran is now on her way to the dirigible hangar," advised
Doc. "She will be waiting."

"Which puts Cousin Pat right in her place," said Pat, whimsically. "I
might have known it."



NONE would have suspected the remarkable contents of the low, shabby
warehouse on the Hudson River shore. The dull building bore only one
sign. This was:

HIDALGO TRADING COMPANY

Shortly before noon, a long, silvery aircraft slid into view. It took
on the proportions of a streamlined dirigible. With its cabin enclosed
within the envelope, the airship appeared at a distance to be as
keenly pointed as a great arrow.

The dirigible proceeded directly down the bay and out to sea. At the
complicated instrument board of the radio, which included an advanced
television set, Johnny picked up ship after ship at sea. Doc himself
was at the controls.

Two hours after leaving New York harbor behind, Johnny let out an
exclamation.

"I've got it, Doc! One of the coastal steamers reports the black yacht
following the coast closely! Operator remarked it seemed to be
dangerously close, considering this swell after last night's storm!"

The nose of the silver sliver veered slightly. The dirigible at this
moment was piercing a cloud bank. Doc Savage had held the ship under
the low ceiling for the purpose of scanning the ocean surface.

Pat Savage was seated with Lady Fotheran. They were as beautiful a
pair of women as would ever be found together. Pat's golden eyes,
somewhat like those of her famous cousin, were almost duplicated by
the calm orbs of her companion. The only difference lay in the quality
of excited anticipation in Pat's, and the cool lack of emotion in Lady
Fotheran's.

"I do hope we rescue the two men who are missing," said Lady Fotheran.
"This is, all so terrible and I feel that I am responsible."

"Doc and his men never feel any one but themselves responsible for the
dangers they face," assured Pat. "It's their life and they like it.
They choose to be adventurers, though any of them could be a leader in
his own profession. I firmly believe each one has only the thought
that death will end their association."

"Like my brothers, both of them," sighed Lady Fotheran. "Now one is
dead, and Ranyon--"

"I wouldn't think about it," consoled Pat quickly. "Look! They have
sighted the black yacht!"

Pat made a little dash to the cabin window. Lady Fotheran moved to her
side. Below them, the long, narrow vessel looked like a toy boat
lashed by a gray sea. As the ship radio man had reported, the yacht
was hugging the shore dangerously.

"I'll bet they think they can escape any pursuit that way," declared
Pat.

"But how can Mr. Savage possibly hope to reach them from up here?"
questioned Lady Fotheran. "There is no landing for the dirigible."

"Leave it to Doc," said Pat, confidently. "Oh, I do believe that yacht
is going on the rocks!"

"Well, I'll be superamalgamated!" exclaimed Johnny. "Whoever's
piloting that boat is crazy! Doc, they're going to crack up!"

Lack of long words proved Johnny's excitement. It did appear as if the
black yacht was dashing straight upon the low reef of one of two small
islands near the shore. Heavy swells broke in foamy feathers of foam
almost under the black boat's bow.

"The pilot is not crazy, Johnny," said Doc, quietly. "There is no
pilot. If you will observe closely, you will notice the yacht is down
by the bow. It has been scuttled and we are too late, unless Monk and
Ham have been left aboard."

The others were amazed at the keenness of Doc's perception. But now
they could see the black yacht was sinking slowly. By some miracle,
the deserted vessel slid past the reef and into the deep water outside
one of the islands.

Doc's corded hands manipulated the dirigible controls, pointing the
streamlined nose downward at a sharp angle. He turned to Renny.

"Take the ship," he said. "Hover over the yacht as closely as you
dare. I am going to board it, if possible."

But before Doc could carry out his plan, the sinking yacht was caught
by a heavy swell and crashed against the jutting teeth of the reef.
The back swell took her off again, and with a lunge, she headed for
the bottom.

Doc said nothing. He was only hoping--as were his companions--that Ham
and Monk were not aboard.



Chapter XIII. DEATH RIDES THE SKY

"THE southern ship route should be clear of storms at this season,"
announced Renny. "At Bermuda, we may learn something. I have a hunch
they would refuel at Bermuda."

"I had thought the same," stated Doc Savage. "We may hear some news
there of the planes. You said, Renny, the southern route should be
clear of storms. There is evidence of a black tempest somewhere
ahead."

Renny glanced quickly at the instruments. The barometer had not
changed. The dirigible was now riding close above slate-colored
clouds. These billowed like a rolling sea. The masses of vapor were
strangely stirred. But there was no evidence of a storm higher up.

Johnny nodded his head sagely. He produced a few long words from his
unlimited vocabulary.

"Manifestly, we are about to undergo a repetition of last night's
inexplicable atmospheric convolutions," he put forth. "Observe the
contortions of the cirrulean strata."

"If you mean the funny way those clouds are twisting around, it does
look like we might be in for something," replied Renny. "Holy cow! One
minute ago the sun was shining, and what's this?"

He referred to the sudden darkening of a sky that had been unclouded
above them. They were holding at a height above where any normal storm
might be expected to break. Violent rains and winds are commonly
produced by the lower strata of clouds.

Lady Fotheran said quietly to Patricia Savage, "I was afraid this
might happen. My brother, Ranyon, was correct in warning us of last
night's curious snowstorm. I am convinced that this Hadith has it in
his power to produce changes in weather."

"Oh, do you really think that?" said Pat cheerfully, excitement
dancing in her golden eyes. "I've always wanted a chance to ride in
Doc's dirigible when there was a storm."

In her own way, Pat was as dauntless as her cool-nerved cousin. Only,
when there was real danger at hand, she expressed herself. Anticipated
enjoyment lightened her attractive face.

Though the darkness was increasing, Doc pointed ahead and to a
slightly higher level.

"They are traveling in five planes," he stated. "They are heavily
loaded and cannot equal our speed."



IT was several minutes before Doc's companions could pick out the five
distant dots in the swiftly darkening sky. In charting a route to pick
up Bermuda, the dirigible was rapidly overtaking the fleeing Bedouins
and the American crooks.

However, the visibility lessened so rapidly that the five flying dots
were quickly lost. The sun first was bathed in the red mist of a wide
halo. The mist had had much the appearance of blood across the sky.

Suddenly, the solar light was wiped out. The clouds below disappeared
as if sprayed by an inky fog. The black fog of the morning in New York
could not be compared to the pall that swiftly shrouded the silver
sliver.

A blast of wind struck the ship with the force of a solid blow.

The nose of the dirigible yawed widely. The craft bucked and pitched
into a vast air pocket. This was a vacuum in which there was no
supporting atmosphere.

Carson Dernall's pallid face immediately took on a greenish hue. The
vitality of the explorer had been sapped by fever germs in the past.
Apparently, he was easily made airsick.

Lady Fotheran paled a little. She was watching Doc Savage intently.

Pat Savage continued to smile a little. But her vivaciousness suffered
a temporary eclipse. The first plunge of the dirigible was like
dropping in Doc's high-speed elevator. Pat had tried that. It always
left her weak in the knees.

But this dive was much longer than the elevator's descent. The ship
was in a hole from which the air had been sucked away for more than a
mile beneath them. The darkness outside had taken on the denseness of
velvety soot.

The variety of instrument needles danced crazily. Compass, air speed,
barometer and radio-directional indicators lost their usefulness.
Johnny, at the radio, clapped his hands over his ears. Something like
an electrical fire ball had seemed to explode inside his head.

"Hope the fins don't crack when we hit the wall!" boomed Renny. "We're
going to bounce!"



CARSON DERNALL stared at him. The explorer's tongue rubbed his lips.
Facing definite danger in the desert where you could put your hands on
an enemy, was something he understood. Being whipped through the sky
like the tail of a diving kite, was something you couldn't put your
hands on.

"Do you think we'll crash?" inquired Dernall, hoarsely.

"That is always a possibility," replied Doc Savage. "However, if the
pilots of the planes ahead can buck it, I believe we will survive."

There came a sudden slowing and gripping of the dirigible. It was as
if the nose had rammed into a wall. Renny manipulated the fins and fed
fuel to the motors. He was picking up the airship the same as he would
have fought a skidding auto.

An ordinary dirigible would have been ripped apart. But this one was
of Doc Savage's design. It was outfitted with alloy motors developed
by Doc. With the help of the missing Monk, one of the world's leading
industrial chemists, the bronze man had devised a synthetic inflation
gas. This was noninflammable and had greater lifting power than either
helium or hydrogen.

Yet its superior design and power were stiffly overtaxed. The
instruments indicated nothing definite. All were strangely off. But
Doc estimated the ship now was fighting to hold a headway of perhaps
about twenty miles an hour. Greater speed was made impossible by the
wind of hurricane force.

The cabin being completely enclosed in the hull gave its occupants an
advantage. In front of Renny were charts and maps of the Middle
Atlantic Ocean and the upper African coast. These now were of no
service. The compasses had failed. They were flying blind, and the
direction might have been any of the four cardinal points.



LONG TOM relieved Johnny at the radio. Picking up steamers in the
swirling, mucky storm was for a time impossible. Some signals were
picked up. Apparently, these were being sent out by ships that were on
a comparatively calm sea. But the words were scrambled and incoherent.

"I can't believe the planes could go through this stuff!" Renny
shouted to make himself heard.

The nearly soundproof cabin could not shut out the shrieking of the
storm. Lightning began stabbing the uncanny midnight darkness of
noontime.

"On the contrary," stated Doc; "I believe the planes are out of the
storm area. The pilots of the Bedouins would hardly risk their own
safety."

"You mean, Doc, you're thinking this storm is something artificial?"
queried Renny. "That maybe it's being made to bust us up?"

"That is my conclusion," advised Doc.

Renny suddenly wrenched at the controls. His gloomy countenance showed
no change, but he spoke quickly in a low voice unusual for him. He did
not want his word to carry to the women and Dernall.

"One of the elevator fins is twisted," he said. "We're going higher,
but it won't respond to allow us to lose altitude."

The dirigible cabin had slanted sharply. The ship was wiggling upward
with a contorted motion.

The following half hour showed no lessening of the black tempest. Lady
Fotheran and Pat were becoming intensely airsick. The same unpleasant
malady had gripped Carson Dernall.

"Do you think we'll come through?" he inquired hoarsely of Doc.

"Our ship is still intact," replied the man of bronze. "It is capable
of resisting great strain. However, it might be well, to have our
parachutes ready."

This last was an unusual admission from Doc. He seldom permitted
others to know his thoughts in extreme danger.

"If it's as bad as that," said Carson Dernall, "do you think it would
be possible for me to get through a radio message to be relayed to New
York? This trip was unexpected. My affairs would be left in a tangled
condition."

"You are welcome to make the attempt," stated Doc. "Perhaps our
messages might be received, where those of others could not reach us."

Carson Dernall staggered with weakness as he got to the radio seat.
His bony hands were shaking. Evidently sickness and fear had him in
their grip. His eyes were bleak with the look of a man who believes
the next minute may be his last.

For some time he worked with the radio. He displayed thorough
familiarity with the various devices. One of his jobs in the desert
had been handling of the radio.

Suddenly Dernall announced he had succeeded in contacting a ship. The
others could catch squawking words from the loudspeaker.

Dernall was talking rapidly.

"This is Carson Dernall, aboard Doc Savage's dirigible adrift in a
storm at sea!" he announced, loudly. "Lady Sathyra Fotheran is with
me! I have a message to be relayed to New York, if possible!"

For three or four minutes, he spoke with staccato sharpness. His words
directed disposal of certain properties in event he failed to survive.
Pat Savage shivered a little. Her attractive face showed the strain.

"He sounds like a man already dead and dictating his will," Pat
murmured.

None could be sure Carson Dernall's strange message had been received.
Scrambled words howled in the loudspeaker. Perhaps some ship had
really picked up the explorer's belated arrangement of his personal
affairs. If so, it would make a great story for the tabloids in
Manhattan.

The silver sliver continued its wild climbing. Renny's best effort
could not compensate for the twisted elevator fin. The others seemed
to be intact.

Ahead of the dirigible suddenly swam a light. It spread like a slowly
rising sun. The apparent phenomenon was quickly explained. The sun
really had appeared. The upper sky was clearing. The ship picked up
greater speed. At the time, it seemed as if the swift craft might
leave the earth's atmosphere and penetrate the stratosphere in its
wild dash directly toward the great orb of day.

Renny's hands experimented. The black tempest had passed almost as
quickly as it had arisen. Instruments swung back to normal. The ship
was considerably off the course that would carry it to Bermuda.
Resuming proper direction was simple, but the craft continued its
driving ascent.

"I've got it, Doc!" announced Renny. "If we could somehow get that
port fin jammed the other way, we could--"

The engineer ceased speaking. Doc Savage was no longer beside him. The
man of bronze had passed from the cabin without a word. His giant body
vanished through a door leading to the inner catwalk of the ship.

"Well, I'll be superamalgamated!" exclaimed Johnny.



DOC SAVAGE gripped his corded legs around a section of the dirigible's
alloy skeleton. This was the framework holding the fins which
controlled the aërial craft. The wind of the ship's terrific speed
tore at his giant body like the invisible hand of a rushing monster.

The man of bronze hung head downward, his figure projecting into
space. The dirigible was now nearly four miles above the low clouds
concealing the Atlantic. Three persons inside the cabin were having
some difficulty breathing. Johnny relieved their distress by putting
the ship's special oxygen apparatus into operation.

At this altitude, the air had thinned out. Many persons arising
quickly to such an immense height are overcome. Doc's lungs expanded
and he breathed easily. Head downward, he swung like a pendulum in the
wind. His smoothly tendoned hands, with cords playing along the
wrists, fastened upon the twisted fin.

Doc pitted his mighty strength against the wind pressure and the
warped control of the fin. His jerking movements apprised Renny that
something was happening. Renny replied with a signal from the
controls. Slowly, bringing his muscles to rigid position, the man of
bronze reversed the direction of the sagging fin.

The nose of the dirigible pointed downward. Doc had no means at hand
to bind the fin in its changed position. His legs locked more firmly.
His head projected into the tearing wind. The bronze body became as
inert as some metal part of the ship. Holding thus, with the sheer
strength of his arms, Doc held the dirigible on its descending course.

No other living man could have continued in that position for more
than a minute. It is doubtful if any other four men would have had the
strength to have moved the fin in the fierce blast of cyclonic speed.

Doc Savage was still holding the elevator in place as the dirigible
slowed, circled and descended at Bermuda.

Lady Fotheran's somewhat inscrutable eyes did not leave the figure of
the bronze man as the landing was made. She was looking at a living
man who, with his bare hands, had literally pulled his own speeding
dirigible out of the sky.

"It is entirely incredible," muttered Carson Dernall.

The explorer's face had resumed somewhat of its more normal pallor.



RENNY descended into the crowd of wondering tourists who had witnessed
the remarkable feat of Doc Savage. The engineer ignored thrusting
hands and a flood of inquiries. In a few minutes, he had returned to
the cabin.

"Five heavily loaded planes refueled here more than an hour ago," he
imparted. "They are carrying the Bedouins and some of Whitey Jano's
men. The Bermuda police refused them permission to enter the town.
They didn't like their looks."

"Probably we will not now overtake them," stated Doc, "We will take a
direct route to the northern African coast. There is a venerable man
in the city of Amman, I wish to see."

"You are going to Amman?" said Carson Dernall. "Yes, that would be the
place to obtain information. It will be possible there to get animals
and supplies for a caravan into the lower Syrian desert."

"Holy cow!" put in Renny. "You mean we've got to ride camels? I'll
ride most anything, but I don't like the queer motions of those desert
ships. They make me sick."

"Oh, I'd love to go places on a camel!" declared Pal Savage,
exuberantly. "I never did."

"It's a dubious pleasure I fear will be denied you this time, Pat,"
stated Doc Savage. "We shall proceed in the dirigible."

"Landings may be difficult," said Carson Dernall.

"We will find some," said the man of bronze. "If Monk and Ham happen
to have survived, I want to find them quickly."



Chapter XIV. CROSS-EYED BEGGAR

HAIFID, the Syrian, was a venerable bag of skin and bones. His beak of
a nose was a meatless sharp bone which gave him the appearance of a
living mummy. His eyes were sunken black pools which betrayed little
emotion. He sat cross-legged on the rug of his baked-earthen hut.

Haifid spoke in purest English, though this was not necessary. Doc
Savage and Johnny sat facing him. In deference to custom and lack of
chairs, the famed adventurers also were hunched cross-legged.

"I fear I must advise you will be tempting powers of such vast evil as
to make even your renowned resources helpless against them," stated
Haifid. "Wise men of great courage have passed through Amman. Some
have gone in the direction of this Valley of Tasus. And some went
seeking this mystic hidden city of Tasunan. Denton Cartheris was the
last who visited Amman. He has not returned."

"Your advice is well spoken," stated Doc Savage, who well knew the
diplomacy with which information must be extracted from the venerable
Syrian. "We will give it heed. Yet we have a mission which must be
performed. We might discover something of great importance. And if two
of my own men have not perished in the sea, they perhaps will be in
the Valley of Tasus."

Haifid inclined his head on his leathery, scrawny string of a neck.

"The Renowned One has been of great service to my people in the past.
I will impart to you all that I know of the Valley of Tasus. The fate
of all men is in the hands of Allah. It is spoken among the people of
the hills in whispers. The Nubian known as Hadith, slave to the sheik
of sheiks, is reported to have revived the shadows of death and caused
them to resume walking across the desert."

Doc Savage said nothing. He listened patiently. Haifid, the Syrian,
would speak at elaborate length. Only in his own way would he divulge
information which would be valuable to the rescue expedition aboard
the dirigible. The man of bronze had the ability to understand and
conform to the manners of all peoples. When in Syria, he became a
Syrian by speech and action.

Haifid often invoked the blessings of Allah, the Prophet, as he
related his fabulous tale of the hidden city of Tasunan. With this he
told of recent rumors of enormous treasure discovered in ancient tombs
of the Valley of Tasus.

"There has even been formed at Alleppo a company of wealthy personages
willing to finance and coöperate with reputed discoverers of this
treasure," said Haifid. "However, these rich men have thus far been
unable to ascertain with whom they should deal in the proposed
development. I repeat, there is great mystery and an aura of evil
beyond the hills in the Valley of Tasus. Those who enter do not
return."



JOHNNY was less patient than Doc. The famed archeologist was eager to
be stirring about the city of Amman in the little time at his disposal
while the dirigible was being refueled and equipped at the direction
of Renny and Long Tom.

Aside from its ancient interest, Amman was one of the few small
paradises of the Syrian desert. It had green trees and streams and
fountains for the refreshment of caravans after long, hot journeys.
The prophecy that Amman would become "a desolate heap, no more
remembered" had fortunately never been fulfilled.

The busy capital of Transjordania, the city was under British
supervision. From a modern Oriental palace floated the green flag of
Islam on Amman's highest hill.

Johnny left Doc Savage with Haifid, as he wandered forth. The bony
scholar attracted almost as much attention as had the ultra-modern
dirigible of the man of bronze. The gleaming, streamlined ship formed
a contrast with the dusty camel ships-of-the-desert that covered
thousands of years of time.



IN the meantime, Patricia Savage had accompanied Lady Fotheran and
Carson Dernall on a walking tour of the beautiful, ancient city. Their
adventure might be intriguing to the vivacious, beautiful Pat. But she
was a woman and quaint shops were filled with lovely silks and various
Oriental oddities. Pat was not overlooking the chance to return with
some of these for her Park Avenue beauty shop.

"If there were not so much tragedy, I could really enjoy all this,"
said Lady Fotheran, as they passed into a narrow lane where the
outlines of mosques and tall minarets could be seen against the sun.
"It really is beautiful."

"But for the Occidental it is a dangerous beauty," supplied Carson
Dernall who seemed determined to take a gloomy outlook of Doc's plan
to enter the lower desert with the dirigible. "I would advise you not
to become separated at any time, and not to go far from the main
business thoroughfares."

Patricia laughed at his forebodings. Then her attractive face was
briefly saddened.

"If we could only feel that Monk and Ham were still alive," she said.
"And oh, forgive me, Lady Fotheran--if your brother is safe. If he is
all right, don't worry, though, Doc will find him."

"I have come to believe Mr. Savage can accomplish anything," declared
Carson Dernall. "Remember my advice: Don't separate. I have some
business to attend to and I'll see you again at the dirigible. It is
getting late. Stay together. Darkness comes quickly."

The sun dropped rapidly. In the clear air of the desert the minarets
of Amman became stark, pointing fingers. The chill of night was close
now. The torrid heat of day was changing swiftly into the almost
frosty breath of darkness.

Pat lingered a moment before an open stall in which Oriental rugs were
displayed. She sighed. Doc probably would frown upon her coming back
with a truckload of purchases. Besides, there was no time. Doc had
announced they would depart as soon as he had interviewed his
venerable friend, Haifid.

Glancing up, Pat noticed Lady Fotheran had strolled ahead. She had
passed around the corner of a baked-clay building, a few yards away.
Pat started to follow.

The beggar sitting at the corner was the most hideous object in human
form Pat had ever seen. His shrunken body supported arms that lacked
all flesh. His sunken eyes were turned upon her sightlessly. Pat was
repelled, and yet she was fascinated. She paused, watching the beggar
for a moment with utter loathing, yet seeming unable to move.

The beggar mumbled in Arabic. Pat's hand sought her purse. She dropped
several pieces of sliver into the outstretched hand of burned skin.
Then she turned to hurry onward. The beggar cried out quickly, as if
in appreciation of her generosity.

The words were in one of the Bedouin tongues of the hills.
Unfortunately, Pat did not understand any of the words, except the
inevitable "Allah."

Pat shivered a little at her close contact with such a horrible
creature and hurried around the corner in the direction taken by Lady
Fotheran. If she had looked back, she would have seen the hideous
beggar arise with remarkable agility for his appearance. He lifted one
hand. His arm was as thin as a stick.

Three Bedouins, clad in the plainest of abbas and kafiehs, appeared as
if by magic from the wall of the narrow street. They glided toward the
corner where Pat Savage had disappeared.

Around this corner, Pat halted abruptly.

"Why, she couldn't have gone so far in that short time," she murmured,
with a little clutch of fear in her throat.

Lady Fotheran had vanished. It hardly seemed possible. This narrow
alleyway ahead had no intersections for at least a hundred yards.
There were no shops, and the flat doors set in the long, low walls
gave them a blank appearance. Lady Fotheran certainly could not have
traversed the length of this gloomy lane since she had separated from
Pat.

Pat hurried ahead. She was too much akin to Doc Savage to betray
nervousness. But she was woman enough to experience an apprehensive
chill over the mystery. Something drew her glance behind her. Three
shadowy Bedouins were gliding toward her.

Pat hastened her steps. The Bedouins seemed contented to remain at a
respectful distance. Suddenly, there was a faint cry. It was the
unmistakable voice of Lady Fotheran.

Pat halted, trying to fix the direction. The cry had seemed to come
from one of the closed, mysterious doors.

Then Pat saw one door which was open a few inches. She went toward it.
Her hand had sought her purse as she moved. Now she had the slightly
comforting feel of her small, but efficient, automatic.

"Lady Fotheran!" she called. "Are you in there?"

Pat watched the partly opened door intently, ready for instant action.
Thus she did not see another flat door open directly behind her. Her
first awareness of this came when a greasy hand was clamped over her
mouth, stifling any outcry.

Sinewy fingers enwrapped the wrist of the hand holding the automatic.
Burning pain followed nerves to Pat's brain. The pistol fell from
numbed fingers. The ruthless hands pulled her from the lane. She was
forced through the door and it closed.



AS soon as her tongue was freed, Pat demanded, "What is it you want
with me? Is this a holdup?"

The voice of half a dozen men gobbled. Two Bedouins were binding Pat's
arms behind her. Another was examining her small automatic with
profound interest. He ended by sticking it into the belt around his
gumbaz. But none made a reply to her question.

"If this is a robbery, take what I have and let me go," said Pat.
"Otherwise, you'll have a lot of trouble."

"Perhaps not so much trouble," spoke a perfectly modulated voice from
an inner door. "It is a pleasure we should meet again."

Though he now wore no honor ribbon and was clad in the native costume
of the desert, the man bowed elaborately.

"And this time, Kassan is making no mistakes," he said.

Pat was rendered speechless for a moment. The Mr. Kassan who had
kidnaped her from a Manhattan hotel, was among the last persons Pat
had expected to meet in Amman. In fact, Doc had learned no planes had
landed here. The bronze man had believed Hadith's Bedouins and Whitey
Jano's mobsters had flown straight for their goal in the desert.

This was partly true, but Mr. Kassan had arrived by other means in
Amman.

"You'll be sorry for this!" snapped Pat, as soon as she recovered her
breath. Then, in spite of her own situation, she asked quickly, "You
know about two of Doc's men who were prisoners. We feared they went
down in the yacht that sank."

"Your concern would seem to be justified," said Mr. Kassan in slow
provocation. "There was little time to worry over adding weight to our
planes. Perhaps they were forgotten."

"My time will come, Mr. Kassan," promised Pat, fire in her eyes, "and
when it does, you'll regret everything you've said and done!"

"I shall endeavor to make sure the time doesn't come," bowed Mr.
Kassan, politely. "For the present, we will prepare for a little
journey."

Light shone from an inner room. It bathed the doorway with the mellow
luminance of an oil lamp. Another individual stepped into the light.

"You!" gasped Pat. "Why--"

A hand was clamped over her mouth. The sweetish odor of chloroform
permeated her nostrils. Slowly the fingers and the mellow light faded
from Pat's vision.



"AFTER only about twenty minutes, I went back by the way I had come,
hoping to meet Lady Fotheran and Miss Savage," said Carson Dernall,
gloomily. "I thought they had returned to the dirigible. But I saw a
beggar I recognized. The fellow was with that black devil, Hadith,
near the Tasus Valley."

"We will separate and make a thorough search," announced Doc Savage.
"The first one learning news of importance will return here and sound
the alarm."

Doc and his companions, with Carson Dernall, were beside the
dirigible. The aërial craft was equipped with a mellow whistle
operated by compressed air. It had been devised by Doc for the
summoning of others in danger or announcement of the ship's presence.

Carson Dernall's bony hands were shaking.

"I feel as if I were responsible," he said. "I shouldn't have left
them for a moment. But I didn't believe any of Hadith's men would be
in Amman. I will accompany you, Mr. Savage. I know many of the
citizens here."

Dernall was forced to take rapid steps, to almost run to keep pace
with the man of bronze. Seldom had Doc Savage been so stirred. He was
blaming himself for having summoned Pat to assist in this adventure.

The unrelieved darkness of a narrow lane enclosed them. Dernall
directed Doc toward the spot where he had seen the beggar.

"It was here at this corner," said the explorer. "He was a hideous
object. And the two women were coming this way when I left them."

The beggar had vanished. The long walls with their flat doors were
closed and silent. Doc flicked on his generator flashlight. Its ray
struck upon a small, glittering object. The shine was like brilliant
light inside a drop of blood.

The bronze man retrieved this. The object was a ruby of vivid fire.
The setting was attached to a small gold link. Doc identified it as
having been torn from Pat's earring. He believed Pat had deliberately
torn the stone from its setting and dropped it. This was what Pat had
done.

Doc whipped over to the nearest door. The ears of Dernall were not
sharp enough to hear the vague rustling in the shadows near by. Nor
were his eyes keen enough to pick out the difference in the shadows
themselves.

The explorer started to exclaim, as he was swung from his feet.

"Keep quiet," Doc whispered. "I'll be right with you."

The edge of the flat roofs of the baked-clay buildings was nearly
fifteen feet above them. Dernall felt himself projected into space. He
was thrown upward as easily as a light stick of wood might have been
tossed. He alighted with a slight crash on his hands and knees on the
roof of the building.

But Doc Savage did not follow. He whirled to the other side of the
lane. The rustling shadows darted toward the spot from which the sound
on the roof had come. The man of bronze flexed his knees only a
trifle. His body was hurled upward without sound. Hands gripped the
edge of the roof on the building opposite that where Dernall had
alighted.

Hoarse whispers in Arabic came distinctly to his ears.

Doc took a small glass globule from one of his pockets. The narrow
lane with its enclosed walls was an ideal place for use of the
chemical gas producing unconsciousness. Doc flicked the globule
downward, heard its slight tinkle. He backed slightly away from the
edge of the roof.

A dozen hands materialized suddenly out of the darkness behind the
bronze figure. Intent on the alley, Doc had failed to note the
presence of the soft-footed Arabs crouched on the roof. They had
waited until he had turned.



ONE corded bronze arm swept two men into space. They fell into the
alleyway with hoarse grunts. But hands were clinging to every possible
portion of Doc's body. Blows were rained upon his head.

Doc realized he was outnumbered. He expected to feel the thrust of a
knife into his throat. With a hissing breath, he dropped flat on his
face and lay still.

"It is enough!" rapped a voice in Arabic. "He will be out for
sufficient time!"

The many hands released their holds. In the dark lane below, a number
of cloaked figures lay as if they had decided to go to sleep. They
would be unconscious for an hour or more. The feet of the Arabs
scuttled from the roof.

Doc Savage pulled himself into a crouch. His head had not suffered
seriously. The bare bronze head should have been stained with blood.
If the attackers had been more observing, they would have noted
something queer about the impact of their clubs.

An astonishing thing happened. Doc seemed to lift off all of his hair.
One hand rubbed a bruised spot on his head. Then he replaced what
appeared to be a tight bronze wig. It was much more valuable than a
wig.

The device had been perfected by Doc, after having been wounded by a
bullet. It was a head-fitting skullcap of the toughest metal alloy.
Bullets could but only glance off it. The blows he had received had
been jarring, but they had been insufficient to stun him.

Doc had understood the Bedouins' words. They had said he would be out
for sufficient time. There was only one guess as to the meaning. Pat
Savage and Lady Fotheran were being taken away. The Arabs had sought
only to prevent a close pursuit.

For some mysterious reason, they had not used a knife. The man of
bronze believed he knew that reason. Native police had assigned
themselves to guard the bronze man's dirigible. They were fascinated
by the streamlined, shining craft of the sky.

And Doc knew there was aboard the dirigible one object that the
mysterious chief behind both Hadith and Whitey Jano wanted greatly to
get into his own possession.

Crouching, Doc listened intently for a few seconds. None stirred in
the alleyway below. The man of bronze could see the edge of the
building roof on which he had tossed Dernall so lightly. Nothing moved
there.

Through the darkness came a mellow, trilling whistle. Doc had
whimsically tuned the alarm of the dirigible with the rare trilling
that emanated from him in moments of deep concentration or of extreme
danger. The dirigible whistle, however, was pitched much louder.

One of the others had received news of Lady Fotheran and Pat.

Doc launched himself into space. It was perhaps twenty feet to the
opposite roof. Doc landed on it lightly, without sound.

Carson Dernall lay in a crumpled heap at the very edge of the
building. Apparently, he had been peering down into the alleyway when
the gas capsule had been crushed. Doc could have administered a remedy
that would have restored the explorer to consciousness. Instead, he
took a quicker method.

He picked up the bony form, holding Dernall lightly across his
shoulders. With gliding movement, he went swiftly across the roofs in
the direction of the dirigible. Doc did not descend into the narrow
lanes at any point. The body of Carson Dernall did not impede his
progress in the slightest. Spaces of nearly twenty feet were covered
in a bound.

Renny was too excited on his own account to question the reason for
Dernall's condition, as Doc deposited him in the ship.

"This old fellow, Haifid, came along," said Renny. "He knows
everything that goes on in the whole town, I guess. He said two white
women were taken away by caravan at sundown. Says there were two
bunches of those black devils grabbed Pat and Lady Fotheran."

"You mean they were not taken away together?" questioned Doc. "That
would make our task somewhat more difficult. One caravan might be
easily located, even at night with the infra-red beam."

"That's it," affirmed Renny. "Old Haifid said there were two herds of
camels, or whatever you call 'em. One, he thinks, went south and the
other east."

"That might be only a trick; probably is," stated Doc. "They figured
we would get the report. Later, the caravans will be united. I think
we're safe in heading for the Valley of Tasus."



WITHIN five minutes, the silvery ship flashed upward into the night.
Except for the lights on the instrument board, the dirigible now
carried no illumination. As Amman's white mosques faded from beneath
them, Doc switched off all luminance on the board.

"All put on the infra-red goggles," he directed. "We must see all that
moves. There are many caravans in the vicinity. In some manner we must
locate Pat and Lady Fotheran before we descend, or we will be wasting
much time."

The man of bronze held the dirigible to slow speed, cruising slowly
only about two hundred yards from the desert floor. In the moonless
night--it being one when the moon would arise near midnight--the
aërial craft would be invisible from the ground.

Carson Dernall revived, groaning. He sat up, blinking at the figure of
Doc Savage outlined in the control window.

"How did we come here?" he questioned. "What happened?"

"That will keep until later," stated Doc. "We are trailing a caravan
which may be holding Lady Fotheran."

Doc swung the dirigible in a complete circle of Amman. Then he headed
southward. The speed was increased. Through the goggles, the desert
was filled with sharply outlined dunes and hills of lava rock.
Contrary to popular belief, only a part of the Arabian desert is of
sand.

"Look, Doc!" exclaimed Renny. "There you are! There are a dozen
horses, and I'd bet those are women tied on two of the camels!"

The exclamation was needless. Doc was already pointing the nose of the
dirigible toward the desert floor.

"Look!" ejaculated Johnny. "Something's happening! There's a big bunch
of riders coming over the hill!"

Rifles were outlined distinctly among this new group. Swiftly riding
Bedouins were coming up for an attack upon the caravan.



Chapter XV. VANISHED RAIDERS

"BE ready with the superfirers," instructed Doc. "Perhaps we should
intervene. Pat and Lady Fotheran will be endangered. I'll put the ship
down upon them. We have not been seen."

But the Bedouins below had heard the motors running. Doc had slowed
them to low speed. The raiding Bedouins suddenly drew up their horses.
Only a few low-lying dunes separated the two parties.

One of the camels of the Bedouins holding the women seemed to be
heavily laden. What appeared to be wooden crates hung on its sides in
the fashion of panniers.

Suddenly the camels carrying Pat and Lady Fotheran were running with
long clumsy strides across the desert. Other camels were dashing away
in another direction. Bedouins on horses with the caravan also were
fleeing.

But two mounted riders remained. They were beside the heavily burdened
camel.

Renny and Johnny had thrust their bodies through apertures especially
prepared for this purpose. Each held an automatic superfirer loaded
with mercy bullets.

"Hold your fire," directed Doc, abruptly. "Something is about to
happen."

The dirigible leveled off. It floated only a hundred yards above the
drama being enacted below. The two Bedouin riders were driving the
laden camel toward the party of raiders over the dunes.

The loaded beast ran with a queer, loping movement. Being a male
camel, the animal squealed with rage at being thus driven. But it
moved faster.

"Look at that," grunted Renny. "Now those two fellows are turning and
running way!"

This was true. The pair of Bedouin camel drivers looked as if they had
suddenly decided to give up their job. They were speeding their horses
after their disappearing companions.

The squealing camel with its jouncing panniers dashed on toward the
now halted raiders.

"Maybe the caravan has some treasure and would rather surrender it
than fight," suggested Long Tom.

Doc Savage said nothing. He was missing no detail of the scene below.
Too late, the surprised Bedouin raiders turned their horses. The laden
camel was among them.

The squeals of the enraged beast died out. The animal seemed to
dissolve suddenly. One instant it was there, running away, and the
next there was nothing.

Light exploded across the desert floor. Greenish, ghostly luminance
was cast over miles of desolate dunes and rocks. The greatest glowing,
the focal point, was in the area where the raiders had halted and the
laden camel had vanished.



LONG TOM was sitting beside the radio controls. He emitted a pained
howl and toppled to the floor of the cabin.

Carson Dernall tore at the metallic goggles over his eyes with frantic
hands. His bony body quivered, as if he had been strapped into an
electric chair. The goggles crashed to the floor and the explorer sat
down with a bewildered expression.

Renny swore and Johnny pushed himself back and dropped the superfirer.

Only Doc appeared unaffected.

"Only light electrical shocks," he advised. "Not strong enough to be
dangerous."

All metal parts of the dirigible were electrified. Defying Doc's
efforts, the craft shot upward. It was completely out of control.

"Something seems to have given the air more solidity," stated Doc.
"The gas has taken on triple lifting force."

The long silver arrow shot skyward. The greenish luminance lay across
the desert like a veil of gauze. This extended for the distance of two
square miles. The light possessed an eerie quality of being material.
Invisible particles filled the atmosphere.

"Holy cow!" growled Renny. "The Arabs and their horses have all
stopped where they are! They haven't moved!"

Carson Dernall made his way weakly toward a window. He looked
downward.

"The shadows," he whispered, huskily. "I'm afraid anything you can do
to help Miss Savage and Lady Fotheran will be too late."

The horses of the Bedouin raiders were like ghost animals. They had
suddenly been carved into illusive statues. The dirigible continued
its freakish climb. The motors had become sluggish. Doc could not
procure enough power to overcome the increased buoyancy of the gas.

"Could you not permit some of the gas to escape and let us get down?"
inquired Carson Dernall.

"I could," stated Doc. "But there are other means of landing. Long
Tom, you take the controls. Renny and Johnny, we'll try the parachute.
This calls for an immediate investigation. Would you care to accompany
us, Mr. Dernall?"

The explorer shook his head negatively. His bony face shivered.

"I'll have to admit my nerve fails me when I think of jumping with a
parachute," he stated. "I'll have to plead some trouble with my heart
as the result of fever. The shock probably would put me out. I'll stay
with Long Tom, but I seriously advise you not to drop down there, Mr.
Savage."



DOC already was buckled into his parachute. Renny and Johnny were
likewise ready. The solemn countenance of Renny took on a funereal
aspect. At last, he was to be given the chance for some action. His
melancholy look was his expression of keenest enjoyment.

Johnny said, "Doc, we're more than a mile up and still climbing. We'll
maybe miss the spot if we go higher."

Long Tom, at the controls, was being guided by the widespread glow on
the desert floor.

"I'll hold the ship as closely over the place as I can," he stated. "I
am getting a little more power. Shall I descend as soon as possible?"

"Catch us with the searchlight beam, as soon as you can get down,"
advised Doc. "By that time, we may be prepared to come back aboard.
But there are some things we should know before we proceed."



THE man of bronze was first to push off into more than a mile of
space. Control of his body enabled him to drop feet-foremost for more
than three thousand feet. Renny and Johnny were tumbling end over end.
None pulled his parachute ring until the desert was leaping up to meet
them.

The silk spread in the last thousand feet. They were deposited on the
desert far beyond the rim of the greenish glow. Doc led the way
through the lava rocks and across the dunes. Their arrival at the
scene of the Bedouins' annihilation was delayed for several minutes,
as they covered more than a mile of rough going.

"Thunderation!" rasped Renny. "I've been in some tough spots and I've
seen queer things, but this makes me feel as if cold water was being
poured on my neck! I don't like this!"

"I'll be superamalgamated!" exclaimed Johnny. "Your sensation of
frigidity is irrefutably nonillusionary!"

"That's right," stated Doc. "It's snowing."

"Holy cow!" gritted Renny, rubbing one huge hand across the back of
his neck. "That's what it is! I thought for a minute I was getting the
jitters as bad as that fellow Dernall, when you invited him to jump."

Big, cold flakes of snow were floating down. They were melting on the
back of Renny's neck. The snow was rapidly becoming thicker. Each of
millions of falling flakes took on the glowing of a firefly. The
supernatural snowstorm in the desert, where even rain was almost
unknown, became a sea of dancing flame.

"We have reached the place," advised Doc.

Renny's big feet kicked into a heap of metal. Saddle trappings and
bridle gear clinked with gruesome significance. Doc and his men were
standing in the midst of grotesque shadows that seemed to dance on the
desert, as the snowflakes laid a shroud over them.

Here and there were small heaps of guns, knives and other metallic
objects which had been the property of the raiding Bedouins. The
ungainly shadow of a camel with a stretching neck was in the middle of
these.

The quality of the snow set their skins tingling. But the glow was
slowly dying out.

The storm was thicker. High in the sky, Long Tom had switched on a
searchlight beam. It showed the dirigible was slowly descending.

Doc pressed the lever on the end of a short cylinder. Lurid red flame
mushroomed. The flash would guide Long Tom to their position.

Then suddenly, across the sky flared another great blaze.



Chapter XVI. THE DIRIGIBLE DISSOLVES

THOUGH the heat retained from the torrid sun of the day caused the
snow to melt rapidly, the flakes fell so fast they piled several
inches deep. The storm was even more freakish than that which had
given Manhattan a blizzardy taste of winter in July.

But Doc Savage, Renny and Johnny were no longer concerned with this
astounding phenomenon. Their gaze was fixed upon the catastrophe high
in the sky. The world's most modern dirigible had burst into flame!

"The thing couldn't happen," muttered Renny in a dazed voice.
"Thunderation, Doc. That gas won't burn!"

Doc was standing as motionless as one of the ghostly Bedouin shadows.

"The gas isn't burning, Renny," he stated. "The fire started with an
explosion inside. Haifid's warning was well intended. Brothers, we are
opposed by forces such as we never before encountered."

Johnny laid aside his verbal cloak of long words. His scholarly face
was sharp with sudden grief.

"Long Tom? He couldn't--Doc, he wouldn't have had time to bail out!"

"We shall have to ascertain that," stated Doc.

The dirigible was a falling mass of flames. Its descent indicated the
special bulkheaded envelope of noncombustible gas had been pierced in
many places. The spot where it would hit apparently was more than two
miles away.

The man of bronze led the others in that direction. They were unable
to keep pace with his flowing speed. Soon Renny and Johnny could no
longer see Doc. They blundered through snow, sand and lava rock,
guided by the falling blaze of the aërial craft.



LONG TOM had been attempting to put the searchlight beam upon Doc and
the others. The motors ceased their sluggish action. They were hitting
efficiently. The special propellers were powerful enough to overcome
the lifting force of the gas.

Long Tom headed toward the desert floor. The infra-red beam was
rendered useless. The thickly falling snow showed queerly as a
blinding mass of flaked soot in the goggles. Long Tom pulled off the
clumsy glasses and used the searchlight.

Suddenly, Long Tom was enveloped in a rushing blast. The explosion was
inside the cabin. He was hurled from the controls. Stunned, as blazing
tongues licked at him like serpents writhing in the air, Long Tom
sought a parachute.

The electrician cried out, "Dernall! Grab a parachute! It's our only
chance!"

He received no reply. The interior of the ship was rapidly becoming an
inferno. The flame was brilliantly blinding. Then came another
explosion, ripping out one whole chunk of the supporting envelope. The
dirigible was plunging downward.

The dirigible was dropping by the nose. Long Tom felt as if he were
falling into a deep black hole. Then he groped toward a hatchway.

Of Carson Dernall, there was no sign. The explorer had been near the
middle of the cabin when the explosion came.



DOC SAVAGE saw his supposedly fireproof dirigible disintegrate. Metal
parts were raining down with the snow. These were being scattered over
a wide area. Only the keen senses of the man of bronze saved him from
being crushed to the ground.

The object hurtling down upon him from space would have ground him
into the lava rock. This was one of the heavy alloy motors. The force
of its impact buried it deeply in the soft stone.

Doc Savage halted. From his body emanated the rare, exotic trilling.
The bronze man crouched flat, merging with the desert floor. He had
seen the shadows of riders scurrying swiftly away over near-by sand
dunes.

When Renny and Johnny arrived, Doc was holding an object in his hands.
It was one of the superfiring pistols. The frame had been warped by
intense heat. The cartridges of mercy bullets had been exploded.

"Holy cow!" exclaimed Renny in an awed tone. "You don't suppose Long
Tom was using that? Who could he have been fighting?"

"I'm afraid the pistol was discharged by the fire," advised Doc. "We
will seek farther."

Renny and Johnny joined in the search with saddened hearts. The warped
pistol was the one Long Tom had always carried under his arm. They
called out several times, circling all of the area over which parts of
the wrecked dirigible were scattered.

They received no response. After several minutes, the three
adventurers converged on one spot.

"Did you find any trace, Doc?" asked Renny.

"There was nothing," said the man of bronze, sadly. "The heat was so
great it melted nearly everything. I found no sign of either Long Tom
or Carson Dernall."

Doc Savage took their minds from the tragic absorption. The man of
bronze had come upon a curious flat container of dull metal. This had
the shape of a thin crate and was about six feet in length. While it
had been marked by the fierce blaze of the dirigible, it was still
entire.

Doc straightened and looked across the low hills. The snowfall had
suddenly ceased. A reddish globe was rising in the east. The late moon
had a bloody face, as if it was emerging from a bath of scarlet fire.

Again the exotic trilling was emitted by the bronze man. Now it was a
rare, tuneless running of the scale. It had the elusive cadence of
falling water murmuring in some deep cave.

Here there was drifted sand. Doc's bronze hands scooped out a hole
several feet in depth. He pushed the flat alloy container into this
and covered it deeply. With a few flat lava rocks, he marked the spot.

The near-by, low-lying hills were whitened by the clinging, wet snow.
They stood out under the rising moon like the flat screens on which
moving pictures are thrown. But the figures now moving across them
were real.

They were trooping riders. They rode with the easy swaying only
attained by the Bedouin horseman of the desert.

"It will be well for each of us to mark this spot," advised Doc.
"Whatever happens, here is buried the most important evidence we have
come upon."

Renny and Johnny were impressed with the apparent evidence buried in
the alloy container. But they were also watching the distant riders
against the hills. This distraction was almost immediately exposed as
a trick. From three directions close by, mounted men rushed upon them.



UNUSUAL for Arabs, these Bedu were attacking in silence. Their usual
method was to make as much noise as possible. The attackers did not
discharge their rifles. These remained in their saddle scabbards.

Plunging horses were being driven directly upon Doc and his men. Renny
was knocked to the sand with a bellowing cry. The big engineer went
down with the superfirer in his hand. The machine pistol erupted a
steady line of flame. It sounded like the continuous twanging of the
strings of a harp.

Two riders howled and fell from their running horses. They struck and
their bodies rolled like sacks.

Johnny's tall figure darted between the riders. His superfirer
hummed. Mercy bullets whanged into men and horses. For a moment, there
was a confusion of fallen riders. But the number of Bedouins was
overwhelming.

Doc's voice came to Renny and Johnny. The man of bronze spoke in the
language of the ancient Mayans. This was understood only by Doc and
his adventurers. They had learned it in the hidden valley of Central
America from which Doc Savage's unlimited wealth originated.

"Cease firing, to save yourselves," was Doc's strange command.
"Otherwise, you may become shadows like many others."

Renny and Johnny obeyed the order, wonderingly. Bedouins surrounded
them quickly. The cloaked riders massed around and cords of camel's
hair encircled their bodies. Slip nooses were drawn and the pair found
themselves being lifted helplessly to the backs of horses.

Their eyes searched for Doc Savage. After he had spoken, the man of
bronze had mysteriously faded from among the dancing horses.

The Bedouins were cursing wildly in Arabic. Renny and Johnny gasped as
half a dozen riders suddenly separated from the others. These six
riders rode stiffly, as if clad in metallic armor. But there was no
clanking of metal joints. The six were driving a riderless horse
before them.

The red moon glow made the low hills stand out. The six riders went
swiftly toward one of these. Renny and Johnny had a brief glimpse of
their bronze leader. He was moving with unbelievable speed toward the
hill. Then he disappeared.



THE mass of Bedouins surrounding Renny and Johnny whipped their horses
away. They seemed to want to vacate that spot in haste.

Over by the low hill, the six riders who rode so stiffly swung from
their horses. Then they did an amazing thing. Whips cut down on the
flanks of the animals. They were starting the unmounted horses away.
The six riders remained beside the unmounted horse they had been
driving.

From what looked like a basket pannier on this horse rolled a globe
the size of two footballs. Renny swore bitterly.

"They've got Doc!" he groaned. "That's something he can't fight,
unless he uses the grenades!"

Renny referred to the high explosive carried by Doc for use in only
the most extreme danger. The engineer and Johnny held their breaths,
as they hoped for a mighty blast to wipe out the six dismounted
Bedouins.

No explosion came. The horses that had been whipped away had stopped
running. They were circling uncertainly.

A fiercely brilliant green light flashed over the hills. The captors
of Renny and Johnny lingered no longer. They were perhaps half a mile
away as the greenish glow spread over the desert. The reddish moon
took on a pale, sickly color. Invisible particles formed a static
tingling in the air.

As the glow reached its height, the six dismounted riders approached
the globe from which it emanated. The sphere of the shadow death had
ceased rolling. It lay like the great green eye of some unhuman
monster.

In the light, the faces of the six men had the color of dull lead.
They were like dead men who walked. Two men carried the long wooden
prongs. Another man carried a cradlelike box. With the prongs, the
glowing globe was rolled into this.

The phosphorescent glow still lay across the desert.

Talking among themselves, the six Bedouins in masks moved in a
widening circle around the spot where the death globe had been.

"What do you make of this?" exclaimed one. "It has been said this Doc
Savage carried many strange devices. Yet we find none of them. There
is nothing of metal remaining."

The masked men seemed greatly surprised. They hunted more thoroughly
about the space. They were rewarded only by the sand and lava rock.
Not even one metal button indicated where Doc Savage might have been.

Clearly, the Bedouins were deeply mystified. With something of fearful
haste, they moved toward the horses they had whipped away.

Here they halted, muttering deep imprecations.

There were now only five horses in the group. Apparently, the sixth
animal had continued on its wild dash across the desert.



Chapter XVII. VALLEY OF TASUS

NEVER before during their careers as companions of Doc Savage had
Renny and Johnny been so deeply apprehensive. Their own plight as
prisoners of the Bedouins concerned them much less than the series of
disasters that had overtaken the man of bronze and the others.

Their belief in the invincible bronze man had always been too firm to
be shaken. The shadow death of the desert had been unnerving. The
destruction of the dirigible of itself was a mystery that had
incredible angles.

The dirigible had been constructed in every way to resist all manner
of fire. Yet the aërial craft had blazed to nothingness in the space
of a few minutes.

Toward daylight, the large party of Bedouins was conducting the
prisoners through a broken country. Hills of lava rock were jumbled
across the desert. There had been no indication of an oasis, yet the
Bedouin riders were heading for a definite goal.

Renny's and Johnny's arms had been bound, but their feet were free in
the stirrups. Armed Bedouins rode beside them. They made no attempt to
interrupt their occasional conversation.

Johnny said, "They're the riders with the shadow death. One of them
just said the All-Wise One will know what is to be done about
something."

Johnny's mastery of the Bedouin language was equal to that of any of
the Arabs.



WHEN the sun broke its first rays of torrid heat across the desert,
the prisoners saw the number of their captors was more than a hundred.
Some of the riders were too far back for their faces to be
distinguished.

A tall, ebony-faced Nubian was in command. This was the first time
Renny and Johnny had seen the former slave, Hadith; but they guessed
his identity. Six riders in the lead-colored masks rode up to him.

Hadith waved his hands in significant gestures, as he uttered wild
imprecations. Apparently, he was displeased with these men.

"Looks like an earthquake makes this country its playground," asserted
Renny, a little later.

They were riding a broken trail. Great hills of lava rock looked as if
they had been recently turned topsy-turvy. The desolation gave no
indication of a single caravan trail anywhere in the vicinity.

"You are manifestly correct," agreed Johnny. "The subterranean strata
of this neighborhood seems to be in a period of transition. I don't
recall any region of this character in the Syrian desert."

After two hours or more of winding through the contorted and jumbled
hills, the Bedouins entered a narrow pass. Hadith, riding a snow-white
Arabian horse, pulled up suddenly. From him came a shrill whistling
cry.

"Look!" exclaimed Renny. "There's that green glow ahead!"

"Right," said Johnny, "and now it's beginning to fade out!"

The narrowness of the pass compelled the riders to proceed in single
file. The bright phosphorescence showed in the gap of the hills. The
sun was not high enough to reach into the pass.

At Hadith's signal, the glow diminished. Hadith held his Bedouins for
a few minutes. Then he gave the order to proceed.

"Holy cow!" boomed Renny. "If this is the only pass and we're on our
way to the Valley of Tasus, it's an easy guess why those who go in
never come out!"

Shelves of lava rock flanked the pass. On these were a dozen figures
wearing the lead-colored masks. Very apparently the gap was closely
guarded. Its narrow confines formed a perfect death trap.

Renny and Johnny were unprepared for the amazing spectacle that
greeted them suddenly. It was as if they had passed by magic from the
barren desert to be confronted by one of the Biblical lands "flowing
with milk and honey."

Beyond perhaps a mile inside, where the desert continued, were tall,
waving date palms. These appeared to be the green guardians of a vast
area of gardens. The trees followed a peculiar conformation.

From this spreading square of cultivated land, apparently well
watered, the palms extended in a single row for several miles over
rolling hills. And on either side of this green row the face of the
hills was composed of the lava rock and sand, dry and burning under
the morning sun.

"That's the big secret of the hidden city, the one Haifid called
Tasunan," announced Johnny. "That marks the course of a subterranean
river. And from the character of the hills and openings, that is the
location of the ancient tombs discovered by Denton Cartheris."

"Holy cow!" exclaimed Renny. "There really is a city!"



ABOUT two miles away, loomed a high, thick wall. Tall, spirelike
minarets glittered in the sun. And this wall was peopled by watchers.
The rarefied air of the desert revealed them as small, black bugs.

The Bedouins crowded closely around Doc's men. They saw their own
destination was not the city.

"Looks like we've come upon the encampment of a whole army," stated
Johnny.

More than two hundred tents occupied a flat, sandy space in the strip
of desert inside the barrier hills. It was like the encampment
affected by some reigning sheik of sheiks. Only it was quickly
apparent that this was ruled over by Hadith, the powerful black who
had been a Nubian slave.

Hadith's voice rang out in guttural command, as the Bedouins rode up
to the camp.

The Nubian was black as ebony. His color was in strange contrast to
the beautiful Arabian steed of white. The shoulders of his abba were
heavily embroidered with gold braid. At his belt hung the huge
scimitar with its glittering jeweled handle in its curved silver
scabbard.

Nothing of the slavelike humility lingered about Hadith. He rode up
with grinning confidence, as proud as a peacock displaying its
feathers. He was a warrior among warriors.

"Wellah!" he cried. "El Farengi!"

Despite their situation and the arduous ride of the night, Renny and
Johnny were hungry. Spicy, greasy odors of savory food assailed their
noses. This was the hour of early eating in the black tents.

Slender bronzed women, with unveiled faces and clad in dusty garments
trailing in the sand, stared at the prisoners. Stark naked children
played before the smaller tents. The women were curious and unashamed,
unlike the Moslem women to be seen in Amman.

Bedouins unbound the prisoners' arms. Hadith rode up. He spoke in
English.

"You will be wise to accept the beneficence of Allah," he stated. "For
the present, you shall be dackhile in the black tents. Do not attempt
to escape, for there is no way."

Renny and Johnny knew that by "dackhile" he meant they would be
inviolate.

One of the Bedouins directed them toward a great, long tent.

This was a ninety-foot pavilion which faced away from the others and
toward the rising sun. This was the tent of Hadith. One end was
curtained off--the hareem, or place of the women.

"Thunderation!" grunted Renny. "I felt like I could eat a whole cow,
but now I'm not so hungry!"

Johnny made a wry grimace. He was perhaps even more fastidious than
Renny.

"Possibly we shall learn to engage in this primitive epicurean
pastime," he stated. "In other words, brother, we'll take it and like
it!"

A dozen Bedouins were crowding around a flat brass vessel. This was
fully five feet across. The Arabs were gorging themselves. They were
using man's original eating utensils, their hands.

In the middle of the brass platter the heads of sheep grinned with
ghastly bared teeth. Their ears were pulled back and flapping. A
greasy mixture flowed over the pile of food. Legs and ribs of mutton
floated on a sea of rice and gravy. The Bedouins scooped up their food
with their right hands.

All of the figures around the platter were wearing the customary
clothes of the desert.

Renny and Johnny moved forward with some hesitation.

"If I have to do it that way, then I'll have to," grunted Renny with
disgust. "Anyway, I've gotta eat."

A thin, sarcastic voice broke across the tent.

"Quit licking your fingers, you missing link! You ought to be able to
throw a ball of rice into that anthropoid aperture without smearing
gravy all over your nightshirt!"

"Blast it!" squeaked another voice. "Eatin' like a pig sure comes
natural to you! If I hafta eat another meal of this junk, I'll be
bleatin' like a lamb!"

"Gibbering like an ape, you mean!"

"Holy cow!" boomed Renny. "Johnny, do you hear that?' It's Monk an'
Ham! They didn't sink with the yacht, after all! Look at Monk in all
those funny clothes! With so much of him hid, he looks almost human!"



LONG-WORDED Johnny surveyed the desert-garbed figures of Monk and Ham.

"Indubitably," he put forth. "Yet I have a disturbing premonition we
have merely encountered confirmation of the theory of reincarnation.
These are but astral spirits in the guise of another existence.
Wouldn't Ham look sweet on Park Avenue in that outfit?"

The apish figure of Monk came to its feet. His kafieh and abba flapped
wildly. One of his big feet splashed squarely into the Bedouin
breakfast. Rice and gravy slopped into the ascetic countenance of the
fastidious Ham.

"Howlin' calamities, Ham!" he squealed. "Doc's got here!"

"You awkward insect!" howled Ham, swabbing gravy from his lean face.
"Even if he has, that isn't keeping me from borrowing a knife and
carving you into spareribs!"

At a command from Hadith, the Bedouins were making room for Renny and
Johnny. Monk's apish form continued to perform a dance of delight. Ham
cleared his face and asked, "Where's Doc? How did that black devil
trap you?"

Before a reply could be made, a woman's scream rang out from one of
the small tents a short distance from the pavilion.

"Renny! Johnny!" the voice cried immediately.

They saw a slender figure running from the tent toward them. The woman
was clothed in the dusty, trailing garments. Her head was closely
hooded.

"It's Pat!" yelled Renny. "Holy cow! But I'm glad to know you are all
right!"

The big engineer mowed Bedouins to one side, making toward Doc's fair
cousin. Two men in kafiehs and abbas sprang toward the girl.

"No you don't, sister!" rapped one of these men. "Dames can't mix with
no men in this hangout! That's orders from the boss!"

The pair were marked by their speech and their faces for what they
were--the mobsters of Whitey Jano. The fact they were clad in flowing
kafiehs and abbas only added to their evil appearance.

One of the men slapped a greasy hand across Pat Savage's lovely face.
The blow knocked her heavily to the sand. Her feet had tangled in the
trailing robe as she fell. Pat attempted to rise.

The mobsters seized her arms and jerked her to her feet. From Renny's
giant chest came a roar like that of a maddened gorilla. A Bedouin who
got between him and the mobsters encountered a fist the size of his
own head. The Arab was turned so nearly over he alighted squarely on
top of his head.

Monk was nearly as quick as Renny.

"I'll eat out the gizzards of two of you anyway!" he howled. "I'll
twist your heads between your shoulders!"

The pair of mobsters saw the avalanche descending upon them. They
dropped Pat, pushing her roughly to the ground. One succeeded in
getting an automatic from the folds of his abba. The pistol blossomed
a stream of fire almost in Renny's face.

But the mobster was given no time to aim. Bullets plowed into Hadith's
pavilion tent. Two Bedouins groaned and slumped on their faces. The
impact of Renny's fist was almost as loud as the exploding weapon.

The mobster's kafieh flew off. When he hit the ground, his head rolled
oddly as if his neck were only a rag. Seldom had Renny ever hit a man
with all of his great strength. No mobster's spine was ever made to
resist such a blow. The mobster quivered and lay still.



MONK'S long arm encircled the other of Pat's assailants. Bones cracked
with the dry snapping of sticks. The mobster fell to the sand with
blood bubbling from his lips. Monk's childlike voice was squealing
with jungle rage.

The big chemist selected the two nearest Bedouins. Though they had
been surprised, the Arabs were flashing long knives. Both Bedouins
struck at the same time, but they had failed to count on Monk's
apelike agility.

One knife sliced across his hairy cheek, but the Bedouins' skulls
cracked together under Monk's hands. Their knives fell to the ground.
Monk stooped and seized both of the weapons. He whirled toward the big
tent.

Renny was holding Pat Savage in the crook of one powerful arm.

"Thishahum, bism er rassoul!" rang the sharp command of Hadith.

"Wellah! Wellah!" responded half a hundred throats.

Dark faces ringed in all four of Doc's men. The Bedouins kept a
respectful distance now, but a dozen or more had seized rifles. The
weapons were pointed.

Hadith leaped toward Renny and Pat Savage.

The heavy, curved scimitar played with a deadly whirling of light
around the Nubian's head. The Nubian face was wearing the glare of a
killer thirsty of blood.

Renny swept Pat behind him. Even his huge fists would be useless
against the swinging blade.

Ham and Johnny were standing now with four Bedouin rifles jammed into
their bodies. Again the Nubian's shout commanded his men to kill.
Renny dived suddenly in the fashion of a football tackler. The
scimitar was swishing downward.

A slow voice of authority interrupted. It was that of Whitey Jano. He
was speaking in Arabic.

"Enough, Hadith!" was the command. "The All-Wise One has decreed these
men shall live! For the present, they are of service to him! Those who
go against his will cannot escape his anger!"

Hadith's arm dropped. His big body was hurled backward.

But Renny and Monk were pinned to the ground by the massed rush of
Bedouins. Whitey Jano had saved their lives.



Chapter XVIII. STAND IN THE TOMBS

MONK groaned and squirmed, trying to relieve the squeezing pressure of
the thongs that bound his arms behind him.

"Dang it!" he complained. "I've been tryin' to work 'em loose an'
they're gettin' tighter!"

"Thunderation!" growled Renny. "How long do you suppose those black
devils intend to leave these things on? I'm paralyzed from the neck
down!"

"Afraid you won't gain anything by fighting them," advised Ham.

With Johnny, he had been bound with the others. Balked of his desire
to spill their blood on the desert, Hadith was using a device which
was rapidly appeasing his bloodthirsty soul.

The four men were fastened with their backs to stakes driven deeply
into the sand. The torrid sun flooded them with furnace heat. Their
faces had baked to the color of boiled lobsters. Even Monk's furry
hair could not protect his ugly countenance from the force of the
direct rays.

Adding a delicate touch of the punishment, Hadith had caused their
arms to be bound tightly in many wrappings of camel hide. The hide had
only recently been stripped and it was green. The sun was drying the
thongs, and as they dried they shortened.

The benevolent-appearing Whitey Jano had made no effort to interfere
with Hadith's idea of a good time. The mob leader from New York seemed
interested only in preserving the adventurers' lives at the behest of
the mysterious All-Wise One.

Whitey sat crosslegged in the shade of a black tent. He was engaged in
his favorite pastime, which the native Bedouins watched with some awe.
Perhaps he had brought a supply with him. For Whitey was juggling
popcorn into the air, catching and crunching it in his white teeth.

Clad in the garb of the desert, with his snowy hair showing under his
kafieh, and his coal-black eyes beaming mildly in his swarthy face,
Whitey might indeed have passed for a sheik of sheiks.

"Curse him!" grunted Renny. "I think he saved our lives only so he
could have some fun!"

"No, it has been the order from this All-Wise One, as they call him,"
imparted Ham. "They were ready to bump off Monk and me, and something
happened. I gather they are expecting to force us to aid them soon.
Listen to that!"

From the direction of the first entrance to the tombs came the
rattling of shots. They were so closely spaced as to identify the
racketing of a machine gun.

"If I've guessed it right," said Ham, "this Ranyon Cartheris is holed
up between the Bedouins and the main gates to the city of Tasunan. For
some reason, they cannot, or don't want to, use this shadow death
stuff close to the tombs themselves. Cartheris seems to be well armed
and to have plenty of ammunition. Besides that, he's got control of a
water supply and food from the gardens."

"Cartheris couldn't have many men, and they're all Arabs," said
Johnny. "So the Bedouins are planning to seize the city of Tasunan?"

"That's the answer," supplied Ham. "I heard Whitey Jano saying the
All-Wise One intends to take possession of the city and enslave its
inhabitants. It seems they are a peaceful people without many weapons,
but they will fight if they're forced to it."

"And Ranyon Cartheris has been standing between them and the city?"
mused Johnny. "I get it now. That's why they grabbed off Lady Fotheran
and Pat Savage. They hope to get at Cartheris through his sister. And
just to make it good, they expect to keep Doc out of their hair by
using Pat as a hostage."

Rifles still cracked in the direction of the tombs. The machine gun
hammered spitefully and the rifle shots ceased.

A thudding explosion shook the ground. Bedouins screamed.

"Good boy!" exploded Renny. "This Cartheris guy has got some
pineapples! That's one reason the black devils aren't walkin' in!"



THE afternoon had been well along when the four men were staked out.
The desert sun hit the rim of the hills. This eased the pressure of
the drying skin thongs a little. Shouts came from the vicinity of the
outer pass.

Hadith and a group of guards rode out. When they returned, they were
accompanied by an enormously fat man. He was of Syrian cast. His face
was rolled in swaths of superfluous flesh. A hawkish nose stuck out
strangely from the greasy countenance. His skin seemed to ooze grease,
or it was bathed in olive oil.

The Syrian had densely black eyes with hardly any pupils. His head was
partly bald and shining. He rode a skittish black horse with inlaid
saddle trappings. Two laden camels followed.

On one of the camels sat a dried-up specimen of the Ethiopian race.
The little black man was the Syrian man-of-all-work, valet, camp
tender, camel driver and general packer. In other words, he was a
slave. His gestures and vacuous expression told he was a mute.

"I am Duzun Kado," the Syrian told Hadith, waving his fat hands. They
were adorned with jeweled rings. "You will conduct me to your master,
in the name of Allah."

Hadith's piercing eyes flashed, but he was discreet. He guided the
intruding stranger to the tent of Whitey Jano. In Arabic, Hadith
imparted a low message of his own. Whitey Jano nodded his head. He was
most benevolent.

"I will learn of his mission before he sees the All-Wise One," stated
Whitey. "If he comes from Alleppo, it is important."

The Syrian had caught the low words.

"I have come from Alleppo," he offered. "I am the humble servant of
the Seven Companies Syndicate. We are prepared to invest in the Tasus
treasure to one-third of its value and quantity, as we have heard
through Amman is the proposal of the All-Wise One."

Whitey Jano tossed popcorn in the air. He trapped it with his strong
teeth and crunched. His smile was benevolent.

"The Seven Companies Syndicate? The All-Wise One has heard of your
organization. Then you are aware one-third of the deposits and no
questions asked, with the stuff to be delivered outside, is the
proposal?"

"Of this we are aware." The Syrian inclined his head. His neck was so
corpulent this action was difficult. "Also, we have been informed the
amount required is enormous, eventually reaching a hundred millions in
gold."

"The sum is trivial," declared Whitey Jano. "Only that includes
noninterference. None of the Seven Companies men are to enter the
Valley of Tasus. The will of the All-Wise One must remain supreme
behind these hills."

"Of this we understand, and it is agreed," accepted Duzun Kado. "My
mission only is to assure us of what exists. If as represented, we are
ready. I have come with a binding payment."

A pudgy hand waved toward the camel packs. The beasts were resting.
The black slave mute had curled up in the shadow of one animal. He was
asleep.

"Wish I could hear what's going on?" put forth Renny.

"I am possessed of a premonition that dire happenings are progressing
toward a climactic conclusion," offered the big-worded Johnny.

"Blast it!" squealed Monk. "If you mean somethin's due to bust, I wish
it would bust! I ain't got no feelin' above my shoulders!"

"That doesn't come under the heading of news, you ape," grinned Ham,
painfully.

The lawyer was suffering as much as the others, but he couldn't resist
the shot.

Whitey Jano gestured to the fat Syrian. They moved into a tent, out of
earshot of the others.



FIGHTING near the tombs had ceased with the sudden desert darkness.
The night chill relieved the torture of the camel-skin thongs. They
stretched a little. In the early moonless darkness, Doc's four
adventurers could not see each other distinctly.

In the tent of Whitey Jano, flickering lights appeared. Duzun Kado
knew when to say nothing with Oriental diplomacy. Once he inquired
politely if it would be the will of the All-Wise One to deal with him
directly.

"Of that, we shall determine," replied Whitey Jano.

The American confidence sharper and leader of mobsters was more and
more taking on the cloak of a true Arabian in speech and action. Only
he continued his ceaseless, annoying crunching of popcorn.

A new figure glided into the tent. His dark features were aristocratic
in every detail. He bore himself with dignity.

"I am Kassan, personal aide to the All-Wise One," he announced. "You
come from the Seven Companies syndicate, at Alleppo?"

Duzun Kado repeated what he had told Whitey Jano. Kassan gave no
indication of being impressed with an offer of a hundred millions.

"With tomorrow's sun, you will have the privilege of examining the
ancient city, which is called Tasunan," stated Kassan. "It is
understood there must be no interference with the present or later
affairs of the All-Wise One with respect to the city of Tasunan or
this valley."

"The lowly representative of the Seven Companies Syndicate is
discreet," bowed Duzun Kado. "The wishes of the true Sons of Islam
shall be respected."

Kassan's thin lips smiled.

"Then it will be well. You will rest in the tent of Hadith, and the
guard will be only for your protection."

Duzun Kado's fathomless black eyes were inky pools. They did not
betray any emotion. Well indeed, the Syrian understood he would be
closely guarded.

The black slave mute huddled a covering around him. His body was
pressed closer to the resting camel for warmth.

Doc's staked companions could see the shadows of the beasts. From
Hadith's pavilion tent came the savory odors of cooking.

"Holy cow!" groaned Renny. "Aren't they goin' to feed us?"

"It ain't cow or any part of it," piped up Monk. "It's sheep again.
All they eat is sheep."



NEAR the staked prisoners, a shadow moved along the ground. There came
a queer scuffling. Some one was approaching the prisoners. He was
accomplishing this almost silently, by the simple method of rolling.

From close beside the four listening captives came a hoarse, nasal
whisper.

"Keep your traps shut an' don't talk," the voice admonished. "All you
do is grab an earful of what I'm handin' out."

None of the four spoke. The thin body of a man jerked into position in
front of them. The figure sat up with a hissing sound of pain. A
small, bulletlike head bobbed up and down on a turtle neck.

"I'm Runt Davis," the man announced. "I'm here because there ain't any
of us got a Chinaman's chance to get outta here. They've got the
finger on you guys, same as Whitey Jano's got our number up. We're all
framed for a rubout with that devilish picture fire. I gotta talk to
somebody."

Runt Davis was sweating, though the night was now chilly. He lifted
his right arm to mop his face. Then he swore bitterly. He kept
forgetting he hadn't any right hand. The bandaged arm was infected and
swollen enormously.

"We don't make any deals with rats," announced Ham. "But you've got us
where we can't avoid listening. So go ahead and spill your woes."

"Ain't no time for splittin' hairs," croaked Runt Davis, huskily. "You
bein' with this Savage guy an' havin' a reputation ain't goin' to win
you nothun' in this deal. Whitey says they've bumped off the big
bronze mug. They're goin' to proposition you fellas."

"They'll be wastin' time," said Ham.

"Yeah? Well maybe. But all they want is what this guy called Monk has
got. This boss they call the All-Wise One is all set to grab off this
town over back of the big wall. Whitey brought us along with a bunch
of machine guns to help snatch the town. When that's done, he has the
sweet little idea of seein' we all get the picture bump, so there
won't be no split an' no squawkin'. I'm only one of a dozen he's put
on the spot."

"Howlin' calamities!" moaned Monk. "Whadda the black devils want with
me?"

"Plenty!" said Runt Davis. "There's only one way into the town. It's
through them old tombs an' under the ground along some kind of a funny
river. They've got to root this guy out that's in there now. He's got
a bunch of them suits that protects them from the picture bump-offs."

"So that's the answer to Cartheris holdin' them off," commented Renny.

"Yeah, an' even when they get through there they've gotta do a lot of
blasting their way into the town," supplied Runt Davis. "That's where
this Monk mug comes in. They've gotta bunch of chemical junk for
mixin' explosives, but the guy that was goin' to do it had a run-in
with Hadith and got himself chopped down."

"I ain't mixin' nothin' for nobody!" squealed Monk, ungrammatically.

"For cryin' out loud, pipe down," hoarsely advised Runt Davis. "If I'm
caught here, it'll be just too bad. An' listen--"

"We're listening but that's all," said Ham.

Runt Davis went on quickly.

"I'm willin' to turn you fellas loose, if you'll give me an' the other
boys a break. Maybe we can burn our way out, an' maybe we can't; but
it's our only chance."

"You mentioned Whitey Jano saying they got Doc Savage?" said Johnny.

"Yeah; that was last night, as I get it. They rubbed out the big
bronze guy when they got you."

The thoughts of the four prisoners became deeply gloomy.

"I don't believe it," declared Ham. "But, anyway, we'll--"



THE darkness spilled a sudden, flaring light. It was a torch of wood
drenched in oil. The thing was tossed almost upon Runt Davis. The one-
armed mobster leaped to his feet with a wild, rending cry. He screamed
profanely.

"It grieved me greatly to have come upon such ingratitude," spoke a
gentle, fatherly voice. "Seize him!"

Two springing Bedouins already had accomplished this simple feat. Runt
Davis ground out oaths and struck at them with the swollen stump of
his severed hand. The Bedouins held him firmly.

"I hope the men of Doc Savage are too intelligent to believe the tale
with which this mistaken boy has attempted to hoax you," said Whitey
Jano.

Whitey stood in the flare of the torch. His jaws crunched popcorn. His
countenance held an expression of deepest sorrow.

"Runt, my boy," he stated, "you have been extremely foolish. It is
true you have incurred the deadly enmity of Hadith. So you tried to
save yourself by involving others. It is too bad, too bad, my boy."

"Don't, Whitey, don't talk like that!" screamed Runt Davis. "I know
what you mean--don't do it! Don't believe him, fellas! He's only--"

Whitey Jano spread his hands. A Bedouin's hand was clamped over Runt's
slavering mouth.

"You see, he would not be advised," observed Whitey Jano, resignedly.
"And so this cannot be avoided."

Whitey Jano lifted one hand. He might have been conferring a
benediction upon his crippled aide. The hands of the Bedouins freed
Runt Davis. But they impelled him forcibly into the darkness.

There was a tall shadow there. The flare of the oil torch picked up
the gleam of a swishing circle. The ebony features of Hadith jumped
into view. Whitey Jano spilled some Arabic words. Hadith made no
reply.

"No! No!" screamed Runt Davis. "Whitey, I didn't mean it! I didn't
mean--"

Whitey tossed a bit of popcorn into the air. He caught it between his
teeth. There was a double crunch. One was of Whitey's jaws. The other
was accompanied by the vicious swishing of Hadith's jeweled scimitar.

The headless body of Runt Davis staggered a full half dozen steps
before it fell. Blood spouted. The small, bullet-like head rolled in
the sand. The flare of the torch showed the glazing of the eyes.

"The will of the All-Wise One is something difficult to understand,"
sighed Whitey Jano, sanctimoniously. "I deeply regret the incident of
this morning. Presently you will be freed, then we will converse."

"If I ever get my hands on you, there won't be any conversation!"
squeaked Monk, his childlike voice quivering with the horror he felt.

"An' that goes double!" roared the impulsive Renny. "That guy might
have been a rat, but you're lower than a snake!"

"I am greatly saddened," said Whitey Jano. "This was unfortunate, but
we shall not permit it to interfere with our future friendliness."

The jaws still crunched as Whitey moved away. By his order, the
gruesome remains of Runt Davis were removed. Hadith had sheathed his
bloody scimitar, after carefully cleansing it in the sand. He came
over and inspected the imprisoning stakes. Then he went away.



FOR a few minutes, the four prisoners were speechless. They had
encountered many horrors. The cool, terrible execution of Runt Davis
had shaken them.

Finally, Renny said, "Do you think that poor little rat was telling
the truth about Doc?"

The replies of the others proved the added report of Doc's fate had
impressed them deeply.

"Still, I don't believe it," insisted Johnny. "Something went haywire
with that death-glow thing."

"But you'd think Doc would have found some way to get in, if he is
still alive," said Ham. "He would--Listen! What's that?"

For the second time, they heard a shuffling in the sand behind them.
All could see a few Bedouins not far away. None spoke. The shuffling
continued. Another man was approaching by the simple method of rolling
in the sand. His body was very small and light.

This the prisoners could not see. The man stayed behind them. Renny
was the first to become conscious of the fact that a knife had slit
the camel-skin thongs. His immense arms, fell inertly to his sides.
All feeling had been squeezed from them. The engineer's big body
seemed partly paralyzed.

Renny saw the others were being cut loose.

"Don't move yet, or speak," came a hoarse whisper.

Ham and the others had the same thought. The voice was American. It
must be one of Runt Davis's pals. Perhaps he was freeing them for
revenge. All believed Runt had told them the truth.

The four men sat motionless for the space of many minutes. They
stifled groans that wanted to break out with the fiery renewal of
circulation in their arms. The whisper came again.

"Scram for them hills above the tombs," it advised. "Make a wide
circle an' dodge the black devils watchin' the Cartheris bunch."

The sand shuffled. Their liberator was gone.



Chapter XIX. THE STAKED WOMAN

"IF they'd only left me so much as one of them grenades, I'd feel
better," complained Monk.

"They stripped us, too," said Renny. "Somebody in that mess is plenty
smart. They even got the stuff outta my hair."

Renny referred to the substance with which Doc Savage's men could
write invisible messages on glass. These were of a chemical that
fluoresced under a specially devised ray.

The four men were crouching in the jumbled rocks of the hills above
the tombs. Voices of the Bedouins gobbled throughout the space near
the black tents. Small parties rode through the darkness with flaring
torches.

The cries indicated they had no hope of finding the escaped prisoners.
A thousand men could have hidden for days in the miles of quake-tossed
lava rock.

Doc's adventurers were free, but they were weaponless.

"And we can't last much longer without food and water," advised Ham.

"Well, I'll be superamalgamated!" exclaimed Johnny. "After the way you
and Monk were putting away mutton chops this morning! Renny and I
haven't had anything since yesterday."

"Anyway, we've got only one chance now," stated Ham. "Before sunrise,
we'll have to join up with this Ranyon Cartheris."

The idea was instantly approved. The carrying out of it was not so
easy. But after half an hour of crawling through the rocks above the
tombs, the four came out above a wide, yawning hole.

A party of Bedouins rode close by with a single torch. From the hole
came the sudden stuttering of a machine gun. A horse screamed with
pain. Two riders fell to the ground without screaming. The torch was
flung aside. The remaining Bedouins fled, leaving the bodies.

"Wait here," directed the waspish, agile Ham. "I'll try and reach
Cartheris."

Ham's slender figure reached the lip of the rocks above the yawning
entrance to the tombs. He could hear low-pitched voices below him. He
called out softly. The voices hushed.

"We are four Americans, the companions of Doc Savage!" stated Ham.

"Look out!" exclaimed a Bedouin's voice below. "It's only a trick! I
was afraid the Bedu would get up there!"

"Wait!" commanded another voice. "The letter I sent my sister may have
brought results!"

Ham was quick-witted. His reply was based on the other's words.

"It was the letter," he called out. "It told of the murder mirage and
how you lost your men in the desert. Lady Fotheran brought it to Doc.
Your sister is here, Cartheris. She was captured by Hadith and his men
along with Pat Savage, Doc's cousin."

"That is correct," said the voice below, but it was filled with
sudden, deep apprehension. "You say my sister is here, in this hell
hole?"

"She is," advised Ham. "We shall come down."



THE four adventurers exclaimed with amazement, when they were in the
entrance to the tombs. Ranyon Cartheris was a lean young man, with a
face worn thinner by fatigue and the hardships he had undergone.

And the explorer who had set out to find the strange treasure
discovered by his brother had only six men with him. One was the
ancient, skinny Mahal mentioned in the letter, who was useless as a
fighting man.

"Holy cow!" ejaculated Renny. "How've you been holding those devils
off?"

The little party of caravan survivors was sheltered behind a low rock
wall. The machine guns, with stacked drums of ammo, were set in
niches. But this was not all the defense.

Machine guns would hardly be effective against the rolling globes of
shadow death. Cartheris, by way of reply to Renny, produced a rubbery-
looking helmet of the color of dull lead. He pulled it over his head.
The mask fitted his face perfectly. The eyes were covered by a
transparent substance resembling mica.

"We wouldn't have lasted long if we hadn't discovered a plentiful
supply of these," said Cartheris. "And where do you suppose they were
found?"

"They would be in the mummy cases of a hitherto unannounced ancient
and vanished race," came the astounding announcement from Johnny.
"They were placed there with the body garments that resist the murder
glow. Perhaps this ancient race believed their dead would be
confronted by a similar danger in some other world."

Ranyon Cartheris gave a long, low whistle of amazement.

"No need for you to announce yourself as William Harper Littlejohn,"
he said. "I've heard a great deal of you from my brother. But your
deduction savors of black magic."

"Not at all," disclaimed Johnny. "Simple enough. This murder glow is
some element unknown today. It has been lost. The suits of metallic
substance and the masks are some alloy that will resist it. I suppose,
of course, you have found the origin of the death globes?"

"No," said Cartheris. "We have been too busy saving our own skins to
penetrate any farther into the diggings. Apparently a whole city, an
advanced civilization, was buried by an earthquake. Much of the ruin
is in mammoth caverns. But we've to stick here and hold off the
Bedouins. We have water and food. As long as our ammunition lasts, we
cannot be ousted."



EVEN then, events were being shaped to disprove the confidence of
Cartheris. It was in the intense darkness immediately preceding the
rising of the moon. A group of half a dozen Bedouins, commanded by
Hadith, were moving on foot.

At a distance of a hundred yards from the tombs' entrance, they were
invisible. Two of the Bedu gripped the arms of a slender woman. A
gagging cloth had been bound tightly between the woman's teeth. She
was propelled to within about one hundred yards of the tombs'
entrance. There she was flung flat on the ground.

In the walled hole with Ranyon Cartheris, Doc's men heard a sudden
thumping. It came from the opaqueness of the sandy barrens directly in
front of the entrance.

"The black fiends are up to something," said Cartheris. "I don't like
taking chance shots in the dark, but maybe a dose of lead from one of
the machine guns will break up their trick, whatever it is."

Thump-thump-thump-thump!

The blows were muffled, but they were repeated rapidly. Ranyon
Cartheris slowly lowered the snout of a machine gun. Though there was
no visibility, it would be easy enough to locate the target by the
continuing sound.

The Bedouins holding the woman were hammering pointed stakes deep into
the sand. This was the cause of the thumping. When the first stake was
in, the slender wrist of the woman was bound to it with thongs.
Another stake was being placed at her feet.

Cartheris was an expert marksman. His ears were good. With gripping
fingers, he started the machine gun jolting. He was aiming at the
sound. After the first short burst, he loosened his hand to listen.

Leaden slugs plowed up the sand. The bullets whipped grit and
particles into the eyes of the Bedouins. A white mobster with a
crooked mouth was with them. A slug bit into his ankle. They were
hitting short and whining over the woman only inches away.

"Hey, you chump!" yelled the white mobster. "Cut off that chopper or
you'll be makin' mincemeat outta your sister!"

Ranyon Cartheris gasped and swore. His hands fell nervelessly from the
machine gun.

"My sister! You don't suppose those fiends would try anything like
that!"

"From what I've seen of them," observed Ham, dryly, "they would gouge
the eyes out of a baby. Lady Fotheran was captured with Pat Savage.
The black devils have got an ace up their sleeve this time. I'll bet
that's why they took the trouble to bring her here alive."



SWEAT of misery was pouring from Ranyon Cartheris's lean face.

"I'm going out there and get her!" he grated. "By the gods! They may
get me, but I'll take some of them along!"

The ancient Mahal was mumbling a prayer to Allah. He spoke:

"There is a time for applying great foresight before acting. We are in
the hands of Allah. Our enemies assail us with a temptation to which
they hope we will yield. Wait."

Ranyon Cartheris shouted in the direction of the stake pounders.

"Curse all of you! We're coming with the guns! We'll burn you off the
face of the earth, you dirty scum!"

The voice of the mobster floated back mockingly.

"Sit on it, brother! The first move you make, the boys with one of
them shadow bump-off balls are all ready to do their stuff! Get the
big idea? All you're supposed to do is keep your shirt on till
daylight! Then you'll get your orders!"

"Howlin' calamities!" squealed Monk.

Cartheris shook as if gripped with the fever of the desert.

"Sathyra! Sathyra!" he called out. "Have they got you there?"

The gag must have been released for a few seconds.

"No! No!" came the strangled cry of a woman. "Don't come out!! They
wouldn't--"

The cry was abruptly choked off. The wailing note of the woman's voice
made it impossible for Cartheris to identify his sister.

But he said to those with him, "What are we going to do?"

"When the question is propounded, that is the time when nothing should
be done until a logical solution is evolved," spoke the wise voice of
the shriveled Mahal. "I greatly fear, however, they have, as the
ferengi puts it, an ace up their sleeve."

Thump-thump-thump-thump!

The last stake was driven. The woman's arms were stretched by the
binding thongs around her wrists. Her slim body convulsed a few times,
then she lay still.

Cartheris and Doc's men were drawn to the flaring of two bright
torches. The brilliant light showed the woman on the ground. Her garb
was American. It was a yellow dress with silver trimmings.

"It's my sister," groaned Cartheris, burying his face in his hands.
"Why did I ever come on this crazy adventure? First Denton, then
Sathyra. I shall go out."

"We have until daylight," suggested the practical Johnny. "Perhaps by
then we can devise some plan."

"Blast it! Look!" exploded Monk. "There ain't much we can do!"



THE flaring torches had been for another purpose than merely that of
showing the woman. Four Bedouin riders came up and dismounted. They
wore the masks of dull lead. Two swung a wooden cradle to the ground.
This was placed alongside the woman.

"The death ball!" exclaimed Renny. "I guess they mean business, all
right!"

The horses were taken away. The four masked men remained. Then the
torches were extinguished.

"Howlin' calamities!" squeaked Monk. "How about us all taking rifles
when it comes daylight? We could make certain we were aiming at all of
them! Then we could all shoot at once!"

Cartheris shook his head.

"In addition to resisting the murder glow, the suits and masks are
absolutely bulletproof. We've been hit a dozen times without injury."

"I recall that," said Ham. "I broke one of my swords on the stuff. I
thought it was some kind of armor."

The white men and the Arabs in the excavation became gloomily silent.
There seemed nothing they could do.

There was much Johnny wanted to know about the underground city of
this ancient civilization. But he refrained from questioning. Ranyon
Cartheris was sunk in his anxious grief for the fate of his sister.



SHORTLY before sunrise, in the tent of Hadith, Duzun Kado was awake.
During the night, the fat Syrian had been a witness to the execution
of Runt Davis. His oily face had remained emotionless.

Afterward, Whitey Jano had entered the place where he slept,
accompanied by Kassan.

Duzun Kado then spoke after the custom of the country.

"My eyes have seen nothing," he announced, solemnly. He spoke on in
Arabic.

"Ana Bwajh el Beduw," he said, recalling to his hosts, "I am in the
face of all Bedouins, I am a dhaif in the black tents. I am dackhile
to you and all Bedouins."

Duzun Kado meant he was protected by sanctuary law, and that he was
inviolate to them all.

As an emissary of the Seven Companies Syndicate, he thus established
his position as a guest of the Bedouins. Even the wildest robbers of
the hills fear to violate the law of the dhaif. Kassan appeared
impressed.

"This violence has been unfortunate, Duzun Kado," he said. "Before the
heat of the sun strikes, we would have you ride with us toward the
city of Tasunan. In the dark hour, we will be ready."

Kassan himself, with a guard of Bedouins, guided the Syrian
representative from the black tents an hour before the sun struck its
light across the Valley of Tasus.



Chapter XX. OUT OF THE TOMBS

FIVE white men's faces were grimly set. Their jaws might have been
carved from marble. And the bony countenances of six Arabs might
equally have been struck from bronze.

Their hands gripped loaded rifles. The first strike of the sun from
the east found them set and ready. But the hands holding the weapons
were as powerless as if bound by rigid thongs.

The slender body of the woman lay stretched on the gritty sand less
than one hundred yards away. In a solemn row beside her sat four
figures as motionless as the rocks. Their faces were the hue of dead
men.

Close to the woman's head was a cradlelike box.

This was all. Four masked Bedouins and the woman. No: Three Bedouins
and one Whitey Jano mobster, the besieged men soon discovered.

For one masked man arose and advanced, walking slowly. He did not
raise his hands as a signal for a truce. This was unnecessary. Perhaps
his crooked mouth was twisted into a mocking grin under his mask.

The mobster knew he was safe from bullets. The death-glow armor
protected him. The body of the woman lying on the sand was an
additional safeguard.

Cartheris groaned, "Anyway, my sister is alive. I saw her move."

The woman was writhing a little, seeking perhaps to relieve her numbed
limbs and body. The rising sun immediately became a blazing fury. The
throttling gag was causing the woman to gasp as she breathed.

"O. K., you mugs!" snarled the masked mobster, when he was only a few
yards from the tomb stronghold. "Alla you are to slip outta them
monkey suits an' come walkin' out with your hands up! Be good boys,
an' nothin' happens, see? Start 'somethin', an' the dame'll be just
another one of them pictures! You've got five minutes to make up your
minds!"

Ranyon Cartheris was white-lipped. His lean face had the color of gray
chalk.

"Listen," he said to the others. "I'm going out there! The rest of you
stay here. She is my sister. I wouldn't want you to--"

"Aw, nuts!" growled Renny. "She might be my sister or somebody else's,
but what's the difference?"

"Any argument is futile," stated Johnny. "What goes for one of us,
goes for all. Those black devils wouldn't hesitate an instant to
annihilate Lady Fotheran."

"Perhaps all are wrong," spoke the calm voice of Mahal. "If we should
refuse to go, they would not destroy the woman, for she is their means
of persuasion."

"A wise thought, indeed, but I wouldn't want to risk it," said Johnny.
"By the way, Cartheris, why haven't they walked in on you before this
with the masked suits?"

Cartheris motioned toward two boxes. They contained nearly a hundred
high-explosive grenades.

"They tried it once yesterday," he stated. "The alloy suits couldn't
save them from that stuff. But we can't use that now."

"Hey!" yelled the mobster. "I'm waitin'! You've got two more minutes!"


Renny let out a bull-like roar. The big engineer was on top of the
rocks. He was holding a pair of binoculars belonging to Cartheris.

"Thunderation!" he bellowed. "She isn't Lady Fotheran! That's Pat--Pat
Savage! They'd murder her and they've still got Lady Fotheran! Come
on! I'm smashin' those devils, armor or no armor!"



RENNY was on his way before he quit shouting. Monk was scrambling
after him!

"Alla you come on out!" yelled the mobster in the mask. "Don't try no
tricks! Behave yourself, an' this All-Wise guy gives the word nobody
won't be hurt!"

"That rather changes the idea of who should go," stated Johnny,
starting to follow Renny and Monk. "It's Doc's cousin. Your sister
apparently is safe in the tents."

"It changes nothing," declared Cartheris. "Mahal, all of us must go."

"You have spoken truth," assented the ancient Bedouin. "It is the will
of Allah!"

Cartheris and the Bedouins with him followed Doc's men into the open.
Renny and Monk disregarded the masked mobster and ran toward the
staked woman on the sand. All coming from the entrance to the tombs
were unarmed. Cartheris and his Arabs held up their hands as they ran.

The three masked Bedouins beside the woman arose. One held the
cradlelike box, as if prepared to empty the death globe beside the
head of Pat Savage.

Cartheris preceded his Arabs. The tribesmen were delayed in their
movement by the infirmities of the aged Mahal. Suddenly, from the
rocks of the hill came a ringing shout. The tall figure of Hadith
appeared. His jeweled scimitar flashed in the morning sunlight.

"Thishahum, bism er rassoul!" his cry echoed along the hill.

Another shout came in Arabic. It meant, "Kill the dogs of the
unfaithful!"

A dozen rifles belched flame and smoke from among the rocks.

The ancient, loyal Mahal was the first to go down. He fell on his
face. His last cry to Allah was a faint wail. The other tribesmen
faltered in their stride.

One fell; then another. All became huddled lumps. Their white abbas
were reddening with blood.

No bullets touched any of the white men.

Ranyon Cartheris turned, gripping futile fists over his head.

"Curse all of you!" he screamed, as if he were temporarily insane.
"Kill me, too! Do you hear? Shoot! Well, why don't you shoot?"

Monk squealed his rage. Renny thundered oaths at Hadith's blood-
thirsty Bedouins. For the minute, all expected to be shot down.

"That's all!" snarled the masked mobster. "I knowed them fellas was
goin' to get it! The All-Wise guy ain't got no use for the black ones
that ain't on the up an' up! Now everybody just sit tight an'
everything's goin' to be all right!"



RENNY and Monk had hurled themselves forward. Each a giant in strength
in his own way, they tore the stakes binding Pat from the sand.
Hadith's Bedouins came rushing down the hill. Hadith was shouting
orders.

Renny tore the gag from Pat's mouth. Her flaky gold eyes, like those
of Doc Savage, tried to smile at him. But Pat's lips were quivering.
It wasn't the first time Pat had been close to death. But being left
as a permanent shadow on the desert was a possibility that had shaken
her nerve.

Hadith's Arabs ringed the white men with rifle muzzles. When Pat was
on her feet, supported by Renny and the apish Monk, none made any
resistance. The inevitable camel-skin thongs drew their arms behind
them.

Hadith snapped out an order. The little procession moved back in the
direction of the tombs. Pat Savage was taken along.

The Bedouins paused only to seize the rifles and machine guns and pass
them out to others who had come up. Then the prisoners were led down a
long, sloping stone pathway.

The cold, dank odor of death was wafted from within the earth under
the rocky hills.

As they went, Johnny took one last swift glance to try and fix their
position. The geologist noted they were starting downward in a line
with the peculiar conformation of the date palm trees.

Hadith jabbered to his men. They were jubilant. The underground
passageway had been cleared for the attack on Tasunan.



THE mute black slave of Duzun Kado hovered like a shadow at his
master's side. His ears might have been stopped to all sound and his
voice stilled, but his queerly opaque black eyes seemed to miss
nothing. Duzun Kado halted the others when they were a mile or more
underground.

Whitey Jano and Kassan, with a guard of a dozen Bedouins trailing
them, had accompanied them into the bowels of the earth. After his
view of the city of Tasunan, the Syrian representative of the Seven
Companies Syndicate was to have a view of the treasure. A treasure for
which he had declared the Seven Companies Syndicate was willing
eventually to pay a hundred millions for a one-third interest.

After the manner of his kind, Duzun Kado spoke elaborately.

"We have put to the test the small specimen we received," he stated.
"Though it is no more than two grams, its power was sufficient to make
the radioactivity of radium seem of little strength. And our report
declares more than five hundred pounds actually are in existence."

"Perhaps it is more, and it might be a little less," replied Kassan.
"These ancient Tasunites, as we have designated them, have scattered
some of it. Apparently, many of the race remained alive after the city
was buried and became a partly subterranean civilization. They then
employed it to defend themselves from their enemies."

"In what manner might that have been accomplished?" inquired the
Syrian, rubbing his fat hands together with pleasure.

"The walls of this passage, for example, are capable of striking the
shadow death whenever those who know the secret choose to release this
power," said Kassan. "Where we are now passing, we could cease to
exist, were certain levers to be operated in the central chamber to
which we are proceeding."

"This is indeed of the greatest interest," intoned the Syrian. "And is
there now any person in the central chamber?"

A benevolent smirk came to Whitey Jano's round mouth. As usual, his
jaws crunched popcorn. Between crunches, he spoke.

"Even now, the levers of the death shadow are prepared," he said,
slowly. "But our worthy guest need have no fear. This is but to strike
in the ancient death chamber of the Tasunans. The place of their
executions. It is filled with shadows of generations. And we, too,
must at times dispose of our enemies."

The fat Syrian rubbed his hands appreciatively. Evidence he had the
cruel, cunning soul of an Oriental seemed positive. But he spoke at
once of other things.

"There exist many passages on different levels," he said. "Is there
purpose in this, or am I presuming too much?"

"Hell, no!" smiled Whitey Jano, lapsing for once into straight
Americanese. Then he explained more, at length, in Arabic.



"WE are in the passage of the shadow death and at its end are the
execution chamber, the storage chamber and the place from which the
defense shadow death of the walls is operated. The tunnel we have
passed leads downward. At a hundred feet below this one, it traverses
under the gardens. Its exit is in the central square of the modern
city of Tasunan. There are many other passages. Some reach remaining
buildings of the ancient city."

Torches of the Bedouins lighted their way. These bathed the walls of
chiseled stone in rippling yellow. Wooden doors appeared here and
there. Whitey Jano pulled open one of these.

Odor of frankincense and myrrh, of other spices, permeated the space.
A torch was thrust in. Long tiers of carven mummy cases occupied
shelves along the walls. The mummy cases were oversize. The wood was
of cedar, perhaps thousands of years old.

Duzun Kado's mute slave shrank back. His seeming dumbness did not
include lack of superstition, apparently. He pressed suddenly to his
master's side. Peculiar cluckings came from his quivering lips.

"The mummy cases are older, infinitely, and of a more intricate design
than those of the earliest Egyptians," commented Duzun Kado. "Let us
proceed. I would waste no further time. Let us view the chamber of the
treasure. Already, we have some understanding of this ancient
element."

"The Seven Companies Syndicate has great wisdom," suggested Kassan.
"The tests have been made."

"Truly," spoke Duzun Kado. "For some time it has been known that
minute quantities of the most powerful radioactive substance will
produce shadow photographs of objects on sensitized plates. This has
been determined with radium. Your element, which we may term
'tasunite,' has been assembled in comparatively vast quantities."

Kassan nodded agreement.

"The Seven Companies Syndicate then, knows the reputed powers of the
ancestors of Hadith?"

"In our poor way, we have experimented," declared Duzun Kado. "This
tasunite is of a purity greater than the radium of pitch-blende or
uranite. Obviously, it will instantly destroy vegetable and animal
matter. Its reflecting exposure sensitizes the earth or near-by
objects for considerable area. This acts like photographic plates. So
much for the legendary aspect of this fabulous force. But the Seven
Companies Syndicate has determined it is of a value greater than
radium, of which the world has less than six pounds in possession of
many people."

Kassan's shrewd black eyes studied the fat Syrian. Whitey Jano munched
his crackling popcorn. Perhaps some of this was beyond his cruder
wisdom.

They stood at a turn in the ancient passage. The fat Syrian observed
the set of the stone walls. His plump hand rubbed along a crack. It
came away covered with oozing dampness. Duzun Kado studied this
unobtrusively. Apparently, they were now directly above the tunnel
leading under the besieged city of Tasunan.



Chapter XXI. BURIED DEATH GLOW

DUZUN KADO, the fat Syrian, paused before the low wooden door
indicated by Whitey Jano. This was set in one wall of a wide turning
of the passage. Whitey tossed a grain of popcorn. The light of the
torches was flickering. He missed catching it. Popping another
directly into his mouth, he crunched.

"We will proceed to the storage chamber of the tasunite," suggested
Whitey. "If the representative of the Seven Companies Syndicate is
satisfied, then audience will be granted with the All-Wise One."

The fat Syrian did not appear to be listening. He appeared resting
momentarily. His breath seemed to wheeze a little, as if from the
effort of propelling his corpulent frame along the passage. The
Bedouins with the torches were grouped a short distance away.

One ear of Duzun Kado was close to the wooden doors. None of the
others could hear anything but Whitey's benevolent tones and the low
mutter of the Bedouins conversing.

From nowhere in particular came a rare trilling which echoed through
the musty passageway. Its little echoes were shivers of tuneful, yet
tuneless, melody. This might have been an escapement of age-old air
from some death crypt. There was instant commotion among the Bedouins.

The Arabs were a superstitious lot. This uncanny sound was
inexplicable. The death glow they now knew and understood. The
Bedouins rustled around. The flares of their torches dipped. Shadows
became uncertain.

For the first time, Whitey Jano's placid countenance lost its
benevolent aspect. His jaws ceased to crunch popcorn.

"Doc Savage! Wellah! Wellah!"

Both Whitey and Kassan whipped around. They had been staring at the
fat Syrian. His greasy, somewhat repulsive face was emotionless.

The loose sleeve of the Syrian fluttered. With the swiftness of a
snake striking, the huge, pudgy fists flew upward. Kassan was closest.
His light body lifted and slammed clear across the passage into the
wall.

Whitey Jano wasn't built for quick movement. He turned as quickly as
possible.

"You--" he got out and no more.

The great fist of Duzun Kado struck again. Its speed was like a light
flashing. Knuckles were buried in Whitey Jano's stomach. From his
gaping mouth spewed crunched popcorn, along with escaping breath from
his lungs. He crashed down upon Kassan.

"Wellah! Wellah!" rolled the cry of the Bedouins through the ancient
passage.

They understood little of this. Only they saw clearly that the fat
Syrian no longer was dackhile. As an inviolate guest he had assailed
his hosts. Torches flaring, the Bedouins rolled in a wave of rage upon
Duzun Kado.



"GET the door open, Long Tom," spoke the calm voice of the fat Syrian.

"O. K., Doc," replied the black, mute slave, whipping a sharp tool
equipped with a generator box from the sleeve of his gumbaz.

Doc Savage shed the abba he had been wearing as a Syrian. The cloak
hampered his movements. The figure of the man of bronze was gigantic.
It seemed to fill the passage. The Bedouins hesitated only a few
seconds.

"Bismillah el rahman!" yelled one.

This invoking the name of Allah sent courage into their veins. A rifle
crashed. Its explosion confined in the passage was shattering to
eardrums. Another, then another gun blasted. The riflemen knew they
could not have missed Doc Savage.

But instead of pitching to the floor, he advanced upon the Bedouins.
They paused uncertainly. Long knives flashed. One whizzed past Doc's
eyes. Had his head not jerked with incredible speed, the blade would
have split his forehead.

Doc's hands made a little flicking movement.

"Don't breathe, Long Tom," he advised. "Hold it longer than usual.
There is little air."

The foremost Bedouins halted in their stride. Their knives made a
clinking on the stone floor. All but one huge Arab smacked to their
knees, much in the attitude of prayer. But they were not blessing the
name of Allah now. They were dropping to sleep in grotesque postures.

The one Bedouin came on with black eyes glittering. He understood
English. He had not breathed. Little glasslike capsules had tinkled on
the stone floor. The passageway was flooded with the anaesthetic gas
devised by Monk at Doc's direction.

Doc did not move until the Bedouin leaped and struck with his knife.
The bronze man permitted the blade to jam into his breast.

"Aiee!" squawked the Bedouin.

His arm was almost cracked. It was as if he had tried to drive steel
into stone. Doc's bulletproof undergarment of metallic chain mesh
bounced the knife from his hand.

As he squawked, the Bedouin breathed. He collapsed with an Asiatic
curse he could not complete.

Doc whipped around. With the flame from the generator box, Long Tom
had pierced the lock of the death chamber door. Doc's corded hands
gripped the edge. The lock fell apart.

Long Tom fanned a ray from his generator flashlight. From the floor
came a series of clucking groans. It was these groans Doc had heard
through the wooden door when the party had stopped on the outside
passage. Minute sounds though they were, Doc's acute sense of hearing
had picked them out.

Doc handed a keen knife to Long Tom. In his own hands he had that
which the Bedouin had dropped.

From the wall came a scraping sound of wood on stone.

"Quickly, Long Tom," advised Doc.

Their knives sheared through camel-hide thongs. Pat Savage was the
first lifted to her feet. She tore the gag from her mouth.

"I knew all the time nothing could happen," she gasped out.

"It will happen if you don't get outside," stated Doc, cutting the
thongs off Renny. "Get out and run along the passage."

The scraping of wood on stone continued with a jerking noise as if the
murder mechanism so long in disuse had stuck. They had been prisoners
in a room in which the murder shadow could operate.

"Ow-ee!" squealed Monk. "Just let me get my hands on the black devils
that give me the scare of my life!"

"Don't talk," advised Doc. "Run!"



MONK loped toward the door. Within ten seconds, all had fled into the
passage. Doc crouched by the door of the death chamber. He guessed the
control chamber of the shadow glow was just beyond that.

From one wall flickered a thread of greenish light. Between his thumb
and finger Doc held a pellet no larger than a small marble. His thumb
nail pushed a lever. He tossed the pellet into the death chamber, well
toward the opposite wall. The pellet contained a high explosive of
terrific power perfected by Doc.

Slamming the door, the bronze giant leaped away after his companions.
All were many yards away when the underground passages rocked with a
terrific explosion. The door of the death chamber behind them parted
from its fastenings and smacked into the opposite wall.

Rocks shattered and crashed. A greenish glow sprang up, but it seemed
to be shredded into vanishing points of light. The air tingled
electrically.

"Keep going toward the first side tunnel," advised Doc.

Before the splintering walls had ceased falling, the man of bronze was
back near the door of the death chamber. He saw the Bedouins sleeping
on the floor.

Whitey Jano and Kassan had miraculously escaped the falling walls. The
cavern of the death chamber was filled with fallen rock. The
instruments of the murderer glow were completely buried. The control
chamber was blocked behind hundreds of tons of rocks.

The passage leading toward the storage chamber of the tasunite was cut
off by a jumbled mass.

"We have temporarily robbed Hadith and the individual they call the
All-Wise One of their greatest power," stated Doc Savage, joining his
companions as they reached the turning of a passageway.

"Now what do we do, Doc?" questioned Pat Savage, trying to get some of
the dirt off her face with the assistance of Long Tom's flashlight.

"Dag-gone it!" piped Monk. "Something will turn up! Ever since they
planted that woman's picture in the window there's been plenty doin'
without thinkin' about it!"

Ranyon Cartheris showed little elation at having been rescued. The
massacre of the faithful old Mahal and the remnant of his expedition
apparently had sapped nearly all his interest in life.

"I'd thought--well, I'd hoped perhaps Denton might somehow be alive,"
he said sadly. "If he was, then he was somewhere inside that
explosion."

The black mouth of a side tunnel loomed before them. Long Tom's flash
showed this slanted downward.

"Perhaps this is the passageway leading under the city of Tasunan!"
exclaimed Johnny.

"It would seem so," assented Doc. "And this is perhaps our only chance
of escaping Hadith's Bedouins outside."

Footsteps clumped in the tunnel darkness. Long Tom switched off his
light. Doc swept the others back. He opened a door. The spiced odor of
ancient grave clothes assailed their nostrils.

A cadaverous form came slowly into the upper passage. The man was
alone. He paused uncertainly.

Doc stood in the door. From his hand played a pencil beam. It struck
upon a face covered with matted beard and terribly emaciated.

"Denton! Denton!" screamed Ranyon Cartheris, hoarsely.



THE younger brother clasped his arms around the mass of filthy rags
enwrapping the attenuated skeleton. The apparition mumbled. His teeth
had been knocked out. His fingers clawed at his brother's shoulders.

Tears furrowed the dirt on Denton Cartheris's cheeks.

"Months I've been there--months, you hear? Sealed--sealed in a tomb--
earthquake just broke down the wall--you've come--everything--
everything's all right--the shadows--shadows!"

The mumbling arose to a scream. The long-imprisoned explorer
collapsed. It seemed he was freed from his tomb to die in his
brother's arms.

But the great surgical skill of Doc Savage saved him. The bronze giant
was perhaps the world's greatest surgeon and physician, along with his
other achievements. He quickly drew emergency tubes from his clothing.

A combination stimulant, stronger than employed in most hospitals,
flowed into the explorer's veins. Swift convulsions ran through the
emaciated body. Then Denton Cartheris breathed regularly, more easily.
He was able quickly to get to his feet.

The crypt of the huge mummy cases consisted of many passages. Monk
pulled off the carved lid of a boatlike ancient coffin. He replaced it
quickly.

"Lookin' at that fella makes me feel like I'd been dead a long time
myself an' they forgot to bury me," said Monk in an awed voice.

"Yeah," drawled Ham. "It was an oversight forgetting that."

"Blast you!" squealed Monk. "In a minute they'll be puttin' you in a
half a dozen of them coffins, 'cause you're goin' to be in that many
pieces or more!"

Doc Savage had become a statue beside the passage door. His
extraordinary auditory sense could hear distinctly where only whispers
came to the others.

Doc held up one hand as warning. All became silent, tense. Then they
heard it. Feet moved, as if a barefooted army was marching. Came the
voice of Hadith, the Nubian. Doc's companions and Denton Cartheris
could understand the Arabic perfectly.

"You have betrayed us, Jano!" was Hadith's accusation. "We had
expected your trickery. Where is this Duzun Kado? You've buried the
treasure to keep it from us. The chamber of control has been
destroyed!"

Whitey Jano was composed. Clearly came the crunching of his jaws. His
tone was gently benevolent, unexcited.

"Don't begin making more mistakes, Hadith," he said, calmly. "You
failed to destroy this Doc Savage; now he has--"



A MUFFLED voice interrupted. Identification of the speaker was
impossible for the prisoners in the mummy crypt, except for Doc
Savage. A knowing smile twitched the corners of the bronze man's
mouth. This seemed ludicrous, seeing he still was presenting the fat,
oily face of the Syrian.

Said this muffled voice, "You cannot get away with it, Jano. I have
known all the time you were prepared to seize the treasure. Our
compact is broken. Now I leave you to Hadith. It is 'yes,' Hadith!"

Only the voices, the sounds told what was happening. For the first
time, the tone of Whitey Jano lost its benevolent coolness.

"No! You don't know what you're saying! I tell you we've been tricked!
Will you listen?"

"There is no more to be said." The muffled voice again. "The All-Wise
One now sees and understands. The All-Wise One has spoken! It has been
agreed!"

"No! No! The All-Wise One wouldn't--couldn't--no! Hadith! Allah, the
Merciful! No!"

Had the soul of Runt Davis been hovering about, its torture must have
been appeased at that strangling scream. The head of the decapitated
mobster must have laughed in unholy glee.

Whitey Jano spoke no more. To Doc's ears came the chilling swish of
Hadith's jeweled scimitar. Two thumps sounded. The lesser one must
have been a head striking the floor of the passage. Whitey Jano's body
dropped after his head.

"That is finished," pronounced the muffled voice, "as the All-Wise One
desires. You will now proceed to search out Doc Savage and those with
him. Temporarily, we have no more of the shadow glow available, but
this bronze man and the others must be disposed of quickly."

"It shall be as the All-Wise One desires," came Hadith's voice.



THE barefooted army scuffled away. None had approached the door of the
mummy crypts. Doc had a quick foreboding of disaster in that simple
fact. Why had they not attempted to enter this door?

The man of bronze concealed his quick belief.

"Whitey Jano has been removed," Doc stated. "I believe that was
intended from the beginning, before he left New York. Hadith, the
Nubian, will follow when this All-Wise One has finished with him."

"Thunderation!" growled Renny. "The double double-crossers! Jano
framin' to bump off his own mobsters! The big chief plannin' to bump
off him an' that Nubian devil!"

"Those who have never had it soon become drunk with power and blood,"
observed the bronze man.

Doc was moving in a gliding circle. He counted a dozen passages filled
with the oversize mummy cases. From somewhere came the whisper of
soft-sandaled feet. These made confusing echoes. The others heard them
not at all.

"All of you hide yourselves," counseled Doc. "Into the empty mummy
cases, as fast as you can find them."

"Howlin' calamities!" complained Monk. "Me get in one of them
coffins?"

"Sure!" hissed Ham. "The coffin won't know the difference!"

Doc's acute hearing and sense of creeping enemies told him they were
being surrounded. The others were making a ghastly clattering as they
pulled lids from the mummy cases. Doc issued a quick order. Long Tom
flicked off his flashlight. Every one fumbled in darkness.

"Oh!" gasped Pat Savage.

Johnny, in a low voice, interpreted the reason for Pat's exclamation.

"Never mind, Pat. The shriveled remnant of prehistoric civilization
animating your sense of repulsion is irretrievably inanimate."

Johnny was not quite himself, or he never would have employed two such
words as "animating" and "inanimate" in the same sentence.

From Pat Savage came no reply. She had not exclaimed, as Johnny had
supposed, at the touch of a long-dead face. A lean hand had whipped
out of the darkness where she stood. It clamped over her mouth. A
thumb found a great nerve at the base of her brain.

The beautiful cousin of Doc was lifted into one of the crypt's
mysterious passages. She had been temporarily paralyzed.

Pat was being abducted again. It seemed to have become somewhat of a
habit with Pat.



THE others did not immediately know it. Doc had sprung to one side,
crouching behind a mummy case. His movement was actuated by a furtive
creeping which multiplied all around the little band.

The space of the mummy crypt flared into light. This was accomplished
by the simultaneous touching off of a dozen oiled torches in a ring
around them.

Instantly came the muffled voice Doc had heard in the outside passage.

"You will make no move or all will die at once! You cannot escape this
time!"

Doc had identified the voice. None of the others had. But Doc had long
known the owner of this voice would be at least partly in command.

None had yet succeeded in hiding in empty mummy cases. Renny bellowed
a confused invective. The big engineer was trapped in the act of
lifting a dried mummy from its ancient coffin. He had intended to try
squeezing his huge body into the space.

Doc remained hidden for only a few seconds. The torch flares glinted
on two-score rifle barrels. The menacing muzzles stuck out from many
passages. There had been another door into the burial crypts. Perhaps
several doors.

"Why, I'll push them guns down their black throats!" yelled Monk.
"I'll--"

"Do as commanded," came the quiet voice of Doc. "The All-Wise One is
speaking the truth, for the present."

The hidden voice laughed croakingly.

"For the present! By your own destruction of access to the shadow
glow, you have become elected to the flowing river!"

The rifles were a threat Doc could not ignore. He might have chanced a
fight for himself, but none of the others now possessed weapons or
bulletproof garb.

The fingers of the bronze man touched one of his high explosive
grenades. He did not act. The high-powered blast could only bring down
the rocks upon them, perhaps seal them in the tombs.

The man of bronze stepped from concealment. Use of the anaesthetic
capsules was blocked by the widely scattered positions of the
Bedouins. Scores could be seen far along many passages.

Renny roared protest. Monk barked wild oaths, his trailing hands
twitching. But all were swiftly surrounded. The tall Hadith, scimitar
flashing, issued commands.

Doc and Long Tom were quickly stripped of every weapon and device.
Doc's partly bald wig, that of the Syrian makeup, was pulled from his
head. This left his smooth, bronze hair shining in the light of the
torches.

Leathery thongs of camelskin were whipped around the arms of all.
Hadith's black face wore a grin of triumphant hate. Thus Doc Savage
could no longer escape the will of Allah, as interpreted by the giant
Nubian.



THE prisoners were pushed into the outer passage. Monk and Ham were in
the rear. Rifles prodded every one. Ham spoke in the language of the
ancient Mayan race. The communication was to Doc. The adventurers used
this tongue when they did not wish to be understood by others.

"Pat is not with us," was Ham's message. "Maybe she got herself hidden
in one of the mummy cases?"

"She did not succeed in hiding," was Doc's surprising reply. "She was
taken away."

The jeweled scimitar of Hadith whirled menacingly over Ham's head. Its
great blade swished past his angular nose. Though the lawyer was
amazed at Doc's words, he deemed it wise to make no answer.

Bedouin riflemen jostled in the passageway behind their prisoners. The
strange procession moved into a new tunnel. It slanted upward. Doc's
face got the feel of dampness in the air, as if a little wind was
blowing across water.

Behind the eight captives--Doc and his men, and the Cartheris
brothers--came Bedouins bearing strange burdens. These were not heavy,
but they were of clumsy pattern. Cedar is the lightest of woods. The
mummy cases were of cedar.

The Arabs were bringing eight oversize mummy cases. The tunnel angled
more sharply upward and came finally to steps carved in stone. Rushing
water gurgled.

The muffled, hidden voice spoke from behind the Bedouins.

"Place all in the ancient coffins!"

Doc and the others were seized by many hands.



Chapter XXII. FLEET OF DEATH

DOC SAVAGE worked at the camel-hide thongs binding his giant arms
behind him. His disguise as the fat Syrian was an advantage. Chunks of
what seemed like flesh peeled from his wrists and hands. A strand of
the thongs loosened.

"Dang it!" howled the voice of Monk close by. "They stick us in
coffins before we're dead, an' they don't even take the trouble to
bury us!"

It was a wonderful opening for Ham. The lawyer ignored it. His own
thoughts were far from pleasant. The darkness was so opaque it seemed
smothering him.

"Doc," came the subdued voice of Renny, "have you got any idea where
we're headed for?"

The bronze man's hands were free.

"That remains to be seen," he replied. "We have come much more than a
mile swiftly. Thus far, the underground river has been confined in an
aqueduct. Presently, it may scatter in the sands."

"Blast 'em, I knew it!" moaned Monk. "When it scatters, where do we
go?"

None of the seven other men had an answer to that one. Doc himself was
flexing the arms that had been bound. Though he could outswim the best
swimmers, it was manifestly impossible for any one to make headway for
a mile of distance against the rapidly flowing underground river.

And if he had attempted it, the seven other men could only have
continued on their gruesome voyage with death waiting at the end. Doc
was analyzing their situation.

The fleet of oversize mummy cases bobbed along on the smooth-flowing
water. Each carried a man. The cedar of the ancient coffins was light.
It would float, as long as space remained above the water.

But how long would there be space? At any minute, the occupants of the
floating mummy cases expected their death boat to bump into some
overhead obstruction. All, including Doc, believed the river would
suck the fleet of ancient, carved cedar into a tunnel without air.

The man of bronze had been stripped even of his bulletproof garments.
Not a single device remained on his body. Yet he did not lose hope. If
he had been alone, he would have attempted fighting his way back. Now,
he could not abandon the others to their fate. By careful maneuvering,
he reached each coffin in turn and released his men's bonds.

Suddenly, a chill struck through the one-man crews of those strange
bobbing boats. The mummy cases had remained well bunched. All at the
same time touched a low roof. The arched stone had slanted sharply
downward. The mummy cases bumped again. Ham's hand went up and touched
a slimy surface worn smooth by centuries of water flow.

"Monk," he called out, "I guess maybe you can't help your looks. I
don't hold anything against you for the things you've said about me."

"Aw nuts!" grunted Monk. "I guess maybe you can't help wantin' to
dress up like a Park Avenue Easter parade. Guess if I had your figure,
I'd wear clothes, too."

With these slight concessions, the pair of verbal feudists proved they
didn't have very optimistic hopes for the future. Under their dueling
insults, they had the highest opinions of each other.

Doc Savage said nothing. His finger tips touched the roof of the
river. It was descending by inches. The edges of the cedar mummy cases
touched now and then. Presently, they were sliding steadily along,
being forced slowly deeper. Water seeped through cracks and soaked the
men.

"There's something I must tell you before it's too late," came the
weak voice of Denton Cartheris. "I have known all the time that the
All-Wise One was--"



HIS communication gurgled to nothing. The explorer's throat had been
choked by inflowing water. Renny gasped and his big body thrashed as
if his huge legs would split the death boat asunder.

The mummy case containing Doc Savage was ahead of the others.

The man of bronze noted a sudden slowing in the speed of the river.
His hands gripped the edges of the wooden case. Rock rasped along his
fingers. He estimated they must have floated at least two miles
through the subterranean passage. There could be no going back, even
if opportunity were given.

The underground stream was coming to its terminus. This might be a
spreading of the water deep down, losing itself in the rocks and sands
of the desert. Or--

"Howlin' calamities!" squealed Monk. "We're comin' up!"

Eight weighted mummy cases bobbed free of the tunnel. All were still
floating. They seemed to have entered a broad underground pond. The
mummy cases moved slowly, as if caught in a great whirlpool. Doc
Savage felt the rocks at the sides. The water gurgled.

It was being sucked away into a small aperture between the rocks. The
man of bronze hurriedly propelled the mummy case along. He came to
another opening. These were only inches in width. There were many of
them.

Doc spoke. His voice echoed eerily. The roof of the river here was a
vast domelike vault.

"We seem to have arrived," he stated.

"Holy cow!" bellowed Renny. "You mean we aren't to be drowned? We're
trapped down here?"

Doc had made a complete round of their prison. The underground pond
was perhaps two hundred yards in diameter.

"Blast it!" rapped Monk. "We'd better have been drowned!"

"Always complaining," said Ham. "There isn't any pleasing the ape
family."

The feud was on again. They had escaped death temporarily.

Suddenly, the rocky vault vibrated strangely. The slowly moving pond
of the death trap danced in little waves.

"An' now it's an earthquake," groaned Renny.

"No," stated Doc. "The attack on Tasunan has begun. That was an
underground explosion. It sounded almost directly beneath us."

A second muffled blast reverberated through the subterranean vault.

"Do you think then, this is all an artificial aqueduct, Doc?" inquired
Johnny.

He received no reply. An empty mummy case bumped against his own. This
was the one that had been occupied by Doc.



DOC SAVAGE was swimming under water. In utter darkness he had retained
an uncanny sense of the direction by which their fleet had entered the
wide pond. The hands of the bronze man were groping along the seamed
stones of the bottom.

In about two minutes he emerged. Swimming rapidly to the others, Doc
Savage spoke quickly.

"Out of the mummy cases and swim," he directed. "Push the cases with
you and follow my voice. See that Denton Cartheris is brought along.
He is unable to help himself."

"What's it all about?" said Renny.

The man of bronze said nothing. He was fumbling with his bronze hair,
which seemed waterproof.

Another deep explosion jarred the domed rocks. The blast might have
been some distance away, but the sound indicated it was far under the
ground.

The eight mummy cases were bunched in one spot. Again Doc had dived
deeply. His hands slid along the bottom. Traveling with the slow
whirlpool of the pond, the man of bronze reached the side where the
inflow was strong.

Absorbing lungfuls of air, he went down again. Now he did a strange
thing. One ear was laid on the bottom stones. Doc remained in that
position for several seconds.

When he came to the surface, the bronze man called out.

"Is every one with the mummy cases?"

"Yes, we're all here," came the voice of Ham. "And we're all standing
up. It's only a few feet deep over here."

"That is good," advised Doc. "Don't any one put his head under water.
Stand where you are."

Doc was treading water. His hands went to his head. It seemed he had
removed his bronze scalp. This was the bulletproof skullcap he often
wore.

From four cavities inside the cap, Doc removed flat, metallic objects.
Each of these was equipped with a small lever. Doc replaced the metal
cap. Again he dived deeply.

Swimming against the current, the man of bronze passed into the
inflowing stream. He progressed several yards. He carefully set a
small lever on one of the flat metallic objects. The current carried
him back into the pond.

From about the middle of the pond, Doc swiftly moved levers on the
remaining three flat objects. He hurled them together in the direction
of the river's entry. Then he dived, swimming rapidly away.



BEDLAM broke loose. Combined blasts threatened to shatter eardrums.
Doc and the others were swept by a huge wave. They were dashed into
the rocky wall. The roof of the underground vault seemed to collapse
on the farther side.

The next succeeding wave was smaller.

Suddenly the water was sucking away. The depths decreased. A booming
hollow sound came from the subterranean tunnel. In a few minutes, the
pond was draining.

Doc led the way over slippery rocks. He came to a gaping aperture in
the floor. Some distance away, water boomed downward. The bottom of
the ancient aqueduct had been blown out. On the side where Doc and his
companions stood, the floor was dry.

The subterranean river of Tasunan was pouring like a Niagara through
the blasted bottom. Tons of water smashed down into a lower tunnel.

From a distance suddenly came cries of men. Faint voices were calling
upon Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. One voice screamed high.
This was not in Arabic. The lower tunnel was filling with a rushing
flood.

The underground stream was smashing through the passage leading
beneath the city of Tasunan. The distant screaming voices died out.

All of the deeper tunnel was flooded to its roof.

The water started surging back. In it floated the bodies of some
Bedouins.

"Come!" directed Doc. "Over this way."

His amazed companions followed. Denton Cartheris came slowly,
supported by his brother. The explosions of Doc's powerful grenades
had opened a gap in the side wall of the huge vault of the pond.

They emerged into the passage at the end of which the death chamber
had been wrecked. Along here, Doc had previously determined the
position of the subterranean aqueduct. He had felt the moisture oozing
through the ancient stone.

His sense of direction and the soundings had enabled him to discover
that the tunnel to Tasunan had been constructed under the river.
Perhaps the Tasunans themselves had first had the idea of thus
flooding their defenses.

As Doc led his men to the yawning entrance, a few Bedouins left
outside were fleeing toward the pass in the hills. The black tents
stood out starkly.

The man of bronze led the way toward one of the smaller black tents.

"Stay back!" he commanded the others.



Chapter XXIII. THE ALL-WISE ONE

DOC SAVAGE gazed only a few seconds at the body in the black tent. He
went in and covered the figure with a beautifully colored shawl. The
head had been almost severed from the body.

"Blast it!" Monk was squawking. "I'm goin' back! Pat's somewhere in
them tombs! Maybe they didn't take her along!"

"Me, too!" agreed Renny. "We've got to find her!"

The fleeing Bedouins were disappearing into the pass.

"It will not be difficult to find Pat," smiled Doc Savage. "She always
manages to come through. This time seems no exception."

The man of bronze was facing toward the jumbled rocks above the
entrance to the tomb. Two figures came from among the rocks. One was
slender with a white face.

The other figure had a dark-skinned countenance. The man wore the
usual kafieh, gumbaz and abba of the Arabian. His white teeth were
showing in a smile. Across his breast was a varicolored ribbon, as of
some honorary degree.

"Why, it's Kassan!" exclaimed the thin voice of Denton Cartheris. "My
good friend Kassan, of the Tasunans!"

Monk had sprung forward. He hadn't heard the explorer's words.

"At last I've gotcha!" yelled Monk. "I'm goin' to rend you into small
pieces an' throw the pieces out for the crows to pick up!"

"Why, Monk!" exclaimed Pat Savage. "I'm surprised at you! Mr. Kassan's
been about the only fun I've had. He's kidnaped me three times. Not
many girls have been so honored."

Pat's dress in which she had been staked to the desert, was sadly
bedraggled. Her face was very, very dirty.

"Look, Doc," she said, jauntily, "what I've brought back with me. Meet
Mr. Kassan who, I understand, is Tasunan's one and only G-Man, if
that's what you'd call it."

"Of that, I have been informed for some time," smiled Doc. "I have to
apologize for our little difficulty in the tombs, Mr. Kassan. But it
was necessary to impress Whitey Jano and the Bedouins. They would have
considered it queer if I had not struck you."

"The pleasure was all mine, I assure you," said Mr. Kassan in perfect
English. "But you certainly pack a tremendous what you would call a
'wallop."

"Yes, Mr. Kassan grabbed me the last time to keep me from falling into
the hands of Hadith," said Pat Savage. "The first time, in Manhattan,
he was kind of rough. I'm glad you hit him once anyway, Doc."

Mr. Kassan bowed low.

"The lovely cousin of Doc Savage always seems to be around when I'm in
a what you call a 'kidnaping mood,'" he smiled. His face hardened
then. "And Hadith and the white man perished in the underground
passage," he added. "We were close by, but came out of another
entrance I know."

"Well, I'll be superamalgamated!" exclaimed Johnny. "And I had proved
by indisputable logic you could be no other than the All-Wise One
himself! Before that, I was getting suspicious of this Carson Dernall,
but he was wiped out with Doc's dirigible."



"CARSON DERNALL was not destroyed with the dirigible," drawled Long
Tom. "He escaped from the blazing craft by parachute, the same as I
did. Doc found me, after he escaped from the Bedouins. That was when
he conceived the plan of our making up as Syrian master and
slave.

"Dernall landed near where I did, but Doc allowed him to get away,
purposely. Dernall lived to carry out his original intention of
double-crossing Whitey Jano. And he intended to put Hadith on the
spot, too. His object was the undisputed control of the tasunite
element and the city of Tasunan.

"It was tasunite that destroyed the dirigible. Dernall had secreted
some of it in the ship. And so great was its power, that, like radium,
only stronger, when released it caused the airship to burn and
disintegrate, even though normally fireproof.

"Dernall intended to set himself up as emperor of the hidden city."

"True in part," stated Doc. "Only Carson Dernall was not the real All-
Wise One."

"That agrees with my own observation," said Mr. Kassan. "But he died
with the others in the flooded tunnel. We Tasunans owe you a great
debt. You shall have as much of the element you have called tasunite
as you desire. It will be worth many millions to you."

Doc smiled and shook his head.

"It is a powerful and dangerous composition, Mr. Kassan. Only a very
little of it would be safe to have abroad. I would advise that only
small quantities be mined from the buried tunnel. I will accept none
for myself, but I would appreciate having your people send some to
various hospitals I will name. I would say Ranyon and Denton Cartheris
are entitled to great reward."

Mr. Kassan was in an expansive, bowing mood.

"They shall have all they desire," he agreed. "But haven't we
forgotten something vital. How about the All-Wise One?'

"You will come with me, Mr. Kassan," said Doc.

Within the black tent, Doc lifted the colored shawl.

"May Allah have mercy and compassion on her soul," murmured Mr.
Kassan.



OUTSIDE, Pat Savage said suddenly, "What has happened to Lady
Fotheran?"

Ranyon Cartheris was grave-faced. Denton Cartheris's emaciated
countenance indicated he must fear the worst.

"Oh," murmured Pat Savage. "I'm sorry."

Doc Savage came from the black tent with Mr. Kassan. He paused beside
the Cartheris brothers.

"If you will accompany me, perhaps we can confirm an idea," said the
man of bronze. "Pat, you will remain here until we return."

Pat Savage was all woman. As the little group moved away, she slipped
to the door of the black tent. Her glimpse showed her a pair of small
feet protruding from under the bright shawl.

Pat gasped and shoved the back of her hand over her mouth.

"So that was it," she said, tears starting to her eyes. "That's why
Doc was so mysterious."

Doc Savage removed a flat, square metal box from one of the camel
packs that had been part of his Duzun Kado equipment. The box was the
one that had dropped from the ruins of the dirigible and which Doc had
hidden in the sand. He had uncovered it and brought it with him when
he and Long Tom had entered the camp as coming from Alleppo.







Now, from the box, Doc took several sections of thick glass. They had
been cut into parts something resembling a cross-word puzzle.

Doc fitted these sections together. The slender, lovely figure of a
woman with an upraised hand appeared. The silhouette of the face was
distinctive. The nose was straight, the chin uptilted. The throat was
a deep, unusually curving line. Doc explained the circumstances of the
window of the music store.

The two Cartheris brothers gazed at it only a moment. Ranyon placed
his arm around the older man's shoulders.

"It's Sathyra, no doubt of it," he said, slowly. "She was seeking your
help, Doc Savage, and went to her death. But who--who is this other
woman lying dead in the tent?"

"She was known as Marian Le Gorde, your sister's secretary and the
wife of Carson Dernall," stated Doc Savage. "Your sister was not aware
of her real identity. Dernall was really under his wife's rule. But a
woman has no face among the Bedouins, so she permitted him to assume
her place as the All-Wise One."

"My sister," murmured Denton Cartheris, dropping to a thin knee. His
hand touched the plate glass reverently. "She died trying to get help
for us."

"The glass shall be buried with all the honors of Tasunan," said Mr.
Kassan. "The All-Wise One lies dead in the black tent. The Bedouins
possibly held her responsible for the disaster underground."

A little later, Mr. Kassan said to Doc Savage and his group: "You
shall be the guests of Tasunan while you are here?"

"Oh, perhaps I shall be kidnaped again!" said Pat Savage, hopefully.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia

