

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The End of a Show
Author: Barry Pain
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0606221.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: August 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


The End of a Show
Barry Pain



It was a little village in the extreme north of Yorkshire, three miles
from a railway-station on a small branch line. It was not a
progressive village; it just kept still and respected itself. The
hills lay all round it, and seemed to shut it out from the rest of the
world. Yet folks were born, and lived, and died, much as in the more
important centres; and there were intervals which required to be
filled with amusement. Entertainments were given by amateurs from time
to time in the schoolroom; sometimes hand-bell ringers or a conjurer
would visit the place, but their reception was not always encouraging.
"Conjurers is nowt, an ringers is nowt," said the sad native
judiciously; "ar dornt regard 'em." But the native brightened up when
in the summer months a few caravans found their way to a piece of
waste land adjoining the churchyard. They formed the village fair, and
for two days they were a popular resort. But it was understood that
the fair had not the glories of old days; it had dwindled. Most things
in connection with this village dwindled.

The first day of the fair was drawing to a close. It was half-past ten
at night, and at eleven the fair would close until the following
morning. This last half-hour was fruitful in business. The steam
roundabout was crowded, the proprietor of the peep-show was taking
pennies very fast, although not so fast as the proprietor of another,
somewhat repulsive, show. A fair number patronized a canvas booth
which bore the following inscription: POPULAR SCIENCE LECTURES,
Admission Free.

At one end of this tent was a table covered with red baize; on it were
bottles and boxes, a human skull, a retort, a large book, and some
bundles of dried herbs. Behind it was the lecturer, an old man, gray
and thin, wearing a bright, coloured dressing-gown. He lectured
volubly and enthusiastically; his energy and the atmosphere of the
tent made him very hot, and occasionally he mopped his forehead.

"I am about to exhibit to you," he said, speaking clearly and
correctly, "a secret known to few, and believed to have come
originally from those wise men of the East referred to in Holy Writ."

Here he filled two test-tubes with water, and placed some bluish-green
crystals in one and some yellow crystals in the other. He went on
talking, quoting scraps of Latin, telling stories, making local and
personal allusions, finally coming back again to his two test-tubes,
both of which now contained almost colourless solutions. He poured
them both together into a flat glass vessel, and the mixture at once
turned to a deep brownish purple. He threw a fragment of something on
to the surface of the mixture, and that fragment at once caught fire.
This favourite trick succeeded; the audience were undoubtedly
impressed, and before they quite realized by what logical connection
the old man had arrived at the subject, he was talking to them about
the abdomen. He seemed to know the most unspeakable and intimate
things about the abdomen. He had made pills which suited its peculiar
needs, which he could, and would sell in boxes at sixpence and one
shilling, according to size. He sold four boxes at once, and was back
in his classical and anecdotal stage, when a woman pressed forward.
She was a very poor woman. Could she have a box of these pills at
half-price? Her son was very bad, very bad. It would be a kindness.

He interrupted her in a dry, distinct voice:

"Woman, I never yet did anyone a kindness, not even myself."

However, a friend pushed some money into her hand, and she bought two
boxes. It was past twelve o'clock now. The flaring lights were out in
the little group of caravans on the waste ground. The tired
proprietors of the shows were asleep. The gravestones in the
churchyard were glimmering white in the bright moonlight. But at the
entrance to that little canvas booth the quack doctor sat on one of
his boxes, smoking a clay pipe. He had taken off the dressing-gown,
and was in his shirt-sleeves; his clothes were black, much worn. His
attention was arrested--he thought that he heard the sound of sobbing.

"It's a God-forsaken world," he said aloud. After a second's silence
he spoke again. "No, I never did a kindness even to myself, though I
thought I did, or I I shouldn't have come to this."

He took his pipe from his mouth and spat. Once more he heard that
strange wailing sound; this time he arose, and walked in the direction
of it.

Yes, that was it. It came from that caravan standing alone where the
trees made a dark spot.

The caravan was gaudily painted, and there were steps from the door to
the ground. He remembered having noticed it once during the day. It
was evident that someone inside was in trouble--great trouble. The old
man knocked gently at the door.

"Who's there? What's the matter?"

"Nothing," said a broken voice from within.

"Are you a woman?"

There was a fearful laugh.

"Neither man nor woman--a show."

"What do you mean?"

"Go round to the side, and you'll see."

The old man went round, and by the light of two wax matches caught a
glimpse of part of the rough painting on the side of the caravan. The
matches dropped from his hand. He came back, and sat down on the steps
of the caravan.

"You are not like that," he said.

"No, worse. I'm not dressed in pretty clothes, and lying on a crimson
velvet couch. I'm half naked, in a corner of this cursed box, and
crying because my owner beat me. Now go, or I'll open the door and
show myself to you as I am now. It would frighten you; it would haunt
your sleep."

"Nothing frightens me. I was a fool once, but I have never been
frightened. What right has this owner over you?"

"He is my father," the voice screamed loudly; then there was more
weeping; then it spoke again: "It's awful; I could bear anything now--
anything--if I thought it would ever be any better; but it won't. My
mind's a woman's and my wants are a woman's, but I am not a woman. I
am a show. The brutes stand round me, talk to me, touch me!"

"There's a way out," said the old man quietly, after a pause. An idea
occurred to him.

"I know--and I daren't take it--I've got a thing here, but I daren't
use it."

"You could drink something--something that wouldn't hurt?"

"Yes."

"You are quite alone?"

"Yes; my owner is in the village, at the inn."

"Then wait a minute."

The old man hastened back to the canvas booth, and fumbled about with
his chemicals. He murmured something about doing someone a kindness at
last. Then he returned to the caravan with a glass of colourless
liquid in his hand.

"Open the door and take it," he said.

The door was opened a very little way. A thin hand was thrust out and
took the glass eagerly.

The door closed, and the voice spoke again.

"It will be easy?"

"Yes."

"Good-bye, then. To your health--"

The old man heard the glass crash on the wooden floor, then he went
back to his scat in front of the booth, and carefully lit another
pipe.

"I will not go," he said aloud. "I fear nothing--not even the results
of my best action."

He listened attentively.

No sound whatever came from the caravan. All was still. Far away the
sky was growing lighter with the dawn of a fine summer day.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


