
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Ripening Rubies
Author: Max Pemberton
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0607771.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: October 2006
Date most recently updated: December 2007

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title: The Ripening Rubies
Author: Max Pemberton





'The plain fact is,' said Lady Faber, 'we are entertaining thieves. It
positively makes me shudder to look at my own guests, and to think that
some of them are criminals.'

We stood together in the conservatory of her house in Portman Square,
looking down upon a brilliant ballroom, upon a glow of colour, and the
radiance of unnumbered gems. She had taken me aside after the fourth
waltz to tell me that her famous belt of rubies had been shorn of one of
its finest pendants; and she showed me beyond possibility of dispute
that the loss was no accident, but another of those amazing thefts which
startled London so frequently during the season of 1893. Nor was hers
the only case. Though I had been in her house but an hour, complaints
from other sources had reached me. The Countess of Dunholm had lost a
crescent brooch of brilliants; Mrs Kenningham-Hardy had missed a spray
of pearls and turquoise; Lady Hallingham made mention of an emerald
locket which was gone, as she thought, from her necklace; though, as she
confessed with a truly feminine doubt, she was not positive that her
maid had given it to her. And these misfortunes, being capped by the
abstraction of Lady Faber's pendant, compelled me to believe that of all
the startling stories of thefts which the season had known the story of
this dance would be the most remarkable.

These things and many more came to my mind as I held the mutilated belt
in my hand and examined the fracture, while my hostess stood, with an
angry flush upon her face, waiting for my verdict. A moment's inspection
of the bauble revealed to me at once its exceeding value, and the means
whereby a pendant of it had been snatched.

'If you will look closely,' said I, 'you will see that the gold chain
here has been cut with a pair of scissors. As we don't know the name of
the person who used them, we may describe them as pickpocket's
scissors.'

'Which means that I am entertaining a pickpocket,' said she, flushing
again at the thought.

'Or a person in possession of a pickpocket's implements,' I suggested.

'How dreadful,' she cried, 'not for myself, though the rubies are very
valuable, but for the others. This is the third dance during the week at
which people's jewels have been stolen. When will it end?'

'The end of it will come,' said I, 'directly that you, and others with
your power to lead, call in the police. It is very evident by this time
that some person is socially engaged in a campaign of wholesale robbery.
While a silly delicacy forbids us to permit our guests to be suspected
or in any way watched, the person we mention may consider himself in a
terrestrial paradise, which is very near the seventh heaven of delight.
He will continue to rob with impunity, and to offer up his thanks for
that generosity of conduct which refuses us a glimpse of his hat, or
even an inspection of the boots in which he may place his plunder.'

'You speak very lightly of it,' she interrupted, as I still held her
belt in my hands. 'Do you know that my husband values the rubies in each
of those pendants at eight hundred pounds?'

'I can quite believe it,' said I; 'some of them are white as these are,
I presume; but I want you to describe it for me, and as accurately as
your memory will let you.'

'How will that help to its recovery?' she asked, looking at me
questioningly.

'Possibly not at all,' I replied; 'but it might be offered for sale at
my place, and I should be glad if I had the means of restoring it to
you. Stranger things have happened.'

'I believe,' said she sharply, 'you would like to find out the thief
yourself.'

'I should not have the smallest objection,' I exclaimed frankly; 'if
these robberies continue, no woman in London will wear real stones; and
I shall be the loser.'

'I have thought of that,' said she; 'but, you know, you are not to make
the slightest attempt to expose any guest in my house; what you do
outside is no concern of mine.'

'Exactly,' said I, 'and for the matter of that I am likely to do very
little in either case; we are working against clever heads; and if my
judgment be correct, there is a whole gang to cope with. But tell me
about the rubies.'

'Well,' said she, 'the stolen pendant is in the shape of a rose. The
belt, as you know, was brought by Lord Faber from Burmah. Besides the
ring of rubies, which each drop has, the missing star includes four
yellow stones, which the natives declare are ripening rubies. It is only
a superstition, of course; but the gems are full of fire, and as
brilliant as diamonds.'

'I know the stones well,' said I; 'the Burmese will sell you rubies of
all colours if you will buy them, though the blue variety is nothing
more than the sapphire. And how long is it since you missed the
pendant?'

'Not ten minutes ago,' she answered.

'Which means that your next partner might be the thief?' I suggested.
'Really, a dance is becoming a capital entertainment.'

'My next partner is my husband,' said she, laughing for the first time,
'and whatever you do, don't say a word to him. He would never forgive me
for losing the rubies.'

When she was gone, I, who had come to her dance solely in the hope that
a word or a face there would cast light upon the amazing mystery of the
season's thefts, went down again where the press was, and stood while
the dancers were pursuing the dreary paths of a 'square'. There before
me were the hundred types one sees in a London ball-room--types of
character and of want of character, of age aping youth, and of youth
aping age, of well-dressed women and ill-dressed women, of dandies and
of the bored, of fresh girlhood and worn maturity. Mixed in the dazzling
_melée,_ or swaying to the rhythm of a music-hall melody, you saw the
lean form of boys; the robust forms of men; the pretty figures of the
girls just out; the figures, not so pretty, of the matrons, who, for the
sake of the picturesque, should long ago have been in. As the picture
changed quickly, and fair faces succeeded to dark faces, and the
coquetting eyes of pretty women passed by with a glance to give place to
the uninteresting eyes of the dancing men, I asked myself what hope
would the astutest spy have of getting a clue to the mysteries in such a
room; how could he look for a moment to name one man or one woman who
had part or lot in the astounding robberies which were the wonder of the
town? Yet I knew that if nothing were done, the sale of jewels in London
would come to the lowest ebb the trade had known, and that I,
personally, should suffer loss to an extent which I did not care to
think about.

I have said often, in jotting down from my book a few of the most
interesting cases which have come to my notice, that I am no detective,
nor do I pretend to the smallest gift of foresight above my fellow men.
Whenever I have busied myself about some trouble it has been from a
personal motive which drove me on, or in the hope of serving someone who
henceforth should serve me. And never have I brought to my aid other
weapon than a certain measure of common sense. In many instances the
purest good chance has given to me my only clue; the merest accident has
set me straight when a hundred roads lay before me. I had come to Lady
Faber's house hoping that the sight of some stranger, a chance word, or
even an impulse might cast light upon the darkness in which we had
walked for many weeks. Yet the longer I stayed in the ball-room the more
futile did the whole thing seem. Though I knew that a nimble-fingered
gentleman might be at my very elbow, that half-a-dozen others might be
dancing cheerfully about me in that way of life to which their rascality
had called them, I had not so much as a hand-breadth of suspicion; saw
no face that was not the face of the dancing ass, or the smart man about
town; did not observe a single creature who led me to hazard a question.
And so profound at last was my disgust that I elbowed my way from the
ball-room in despair; and went again to the conservatory where the palms
waved seductively, and the flying corks of the champagne bottles made
music harmonious to hear.

There were few people in this room at the moment--old General Sharard,
who was never yet known to leave a refreshment table until the supper
table was set; the Rev. Arthur Mellbank, the curate of St Peter's,
sipping tea; a lean youth who ate an ice with the relish of a schoolboy;
and the ubiquitous Sibyl Kavanagh, who has been vulgarly described as a
garrison hack. She was a woman of many partialities, whom every one saw
at every dance, and then asked how she got there--a woman with
sufficient personal attraction left to remind you that she was _passée_,
and sufficient wit to make an interval tolerable. I, as a rule, had
danced once with her, and then avoided both her programme and her
chatter; but now that I came suddenly upon her, she cried out with a
delicious pretence of artlessness, and ostentatiously made room for me
at her side.

'_Do_ get me another cup of tea,' she said; 'I've been talking for ten
minutes to Colonel Harner, who has just come from the great thirst land,
and I've caught it.'

'You'll ruin your nerves,' said I, as I fetched her the cup, 'and you'll
miss the next dance.'

'I'll sit it out with you,' she cried gushingly; 'and as for nerves, I
haven't got any; I must have shed them with my first teeth. But I want
to talk to you--you've heard the news, of course! Isn't it dreadful?'

She said this with a beautiful look of sadness, and for a moment I did
not know to what she referred. Then it dawned upon my mind that she had
heard of Lady Faber's loss.

'Yes,' said I, 'it's the profoundest mystery I have ever known.'

'And can't you think of any explanation at all?' she asked, as she drank
her tea at a draught. 'Isn't it possible to suspect some one just to
pass the time?'

'If you can suggest any one,' said I, 'we will begin with pleasure.'

'Well, there's no one in this room to think of, is there?' she asked
with her limpid laugh; 'of course you couldn't search the curate's
pockets, unless sermons were missing instead of rubies?'

'This is a case of "sermons in stones",' I replied, 'and a very serious
case. I wonder you have escaped with all those pretty brilliants on your
sleeves.'

'But I haven't escaped,' she cried; 'why, you're not up to date. Don't
you know that I lost a marquise brooch at the Hayes's dance the other
evening? I have never heard the last of it from my husband, who will not
believe for a minute that I did not lose it in the crowd.'

'And you yourself believe----'

'That it was stolen, of course. I pin my brooches too well to lose
them--some one took it in the same cruel way that Lady Faber's rubies
have been taken. Isn't it really awful to think that at every party we
go to thieves go with us? It's enough to make one emigrate to the
shires.'

She fell to the flippant mood again, for nothing could keep her from
that; and as there was obviously nothing to be learnt from her, I
listened to her chatter sufferingly.

'But we were going to suspect people,' she continued suddenly, 'and we
have not done it. As we can't begin with the curate, let's take the slim
young man opposite. Hasn't he what Sheridan calls--but there, I mustn't
say it; you know--a something disinheriting countenance?'

'He eats too many jam tarts and drinks too much lemonade to be a
criminal,' I replied; 'besides, he is not occupied, you'll have to look
in the ball-room.'

'I can just see the top of the men's heads,' said she, craning her neck
forward in the effort. 'Have you noticed that when a man is dancing,
either he stargazes in ecstasy, as though he were in heaven, or looks
down to his boots--well, as if it were the other thing?'

'Possibly,' said I; 'but you're not going to constitute yourself a
_vehmgericht_ from seeing the top of people's heads.'

'Indeed,' she cried, 'that shows how little you know; there is more
character in the crown of an old man's head than is dreamt of in your
philosophy, as what's-his-name says. Look at that shining roof bobbing
up there, for instance; that is the halo of port and honesty--and a
difficulty in dancing the polka. Oh! that mine enemy would dance the
polka--especially if he were stout.'

'Do you really possess an enemy?' I asked, as she fell into a vulgar
burst of laughter at her own humour; but she said:

'Do I possess one? Go and discuss me with the other women--that's what I
tell all my partners to do; and they come back and report to me. It's as
good as a play!'

'It must be,' said I, 'a complete extravaganza. But your enemy has
finished his exercise, and they are going to play a waltz. Shall I take
you down?'

'Yes,' she cried, 'and don't forget to discuss me. Oh, these crushes!'

She said this as we came to the press upon the corner of the stairs
leading to the ball-room, a corner where she was pushed desperately
against the banisters. The vigour of the polka had sent an army of
dancers to the conservatory, and for some minutes we could neither
descend nor go back; but when the press was somewhat relieved, and she
made an effort to progress, her dress caught in a spike of the
iron-work, and the top of a panel of silk which went down one side of it
was ripped open and left hanging. For a minute she did not notice the
mishap; but as the torn panel of silk fell away slightly from the more
substantial portion of her dress, I observed, pinned to the inner side
of it, a large crescent brooch of diamonds. In the same instant she
turned with indescribable quickness, and made good the damage. But her
face was scarlet in the flush of its colour; and she looked at me with
questioning eyes.

'What a miserable accident,' she said. 'I have spoilt my gown.'

'Have you?' said I sympathetically, 'I hope it was not my
clumsiness--but really there doesn't seem much damage done. Did you tear
it in front?'

There was need of very great restraint in saying this. Though I stood
simply palpitating with amazement, and had to make some show of
examining her gown, I knew that even an ill-judged word might undo the
whole good of the amazing discovery, and deprive me of that which
appeared to be one of the most astounding stories of the year. To put an
end to the interview, I asked her laughingly if she would not care to
see one of the maids upstairs; and she jumped at the excuse, leaving me
upon the landing to watch her hurriedly mounting to the bedroom storey
above.

When she was gone, I went back to the conservatory and drank a cup of
tea, always the best promotor of clear thought; and for some ten minutes
I turned the thing over in my mind. Who was Mrs Sibyl Kavanagh, and why
had she sewn a brooch of brilliants to the inside of a panel of her
gown--sewn it in a place where it was as safely hid from sight as though
buried in the Thames? A child could have given the answer--but a child
would have overlooked many things which were vital to the development of
the unavoidable conclusion of the discovery. The brooch that I had seen
corresponded perfectly with the crescent of which Lady Dunholme was
robbed--yet it was a brooch which a hundred women might have possessed;
and if I had simply stepped down and told Lady Faber, 'the thief you are
entertaining is Mrs Sibyl Kavanagh', a slander action with damages had
trodden upon the heels of the folly. Yet I would have given a hundred
pounds to have been allowed full inspection of the whole panel of the
woman's dress--and I would have staked an equal sum that there had been
found in it the pendant of the ripening rubies; a pendant which seemed
to me the one certain clue that would end the series of jewel robberies,
and the colossal mystery of the year. Now, however, the woman had gone
upstairs to hide in another place whatever she had to hide; and for the
time it was unlikely that a sudden searching of her dress would add to
my knowledge.

A second cup of tea helped me still further on my path. It made quite
clear to me the fact that the woman was the recipient of the stolen
jewels, rather than the actual taker of them. She, clearly, could not
use the scissors which had severed Lady Faber's pendant from the ruby
belt. A skilful man had in all probability done that--but which man, or
perhaps men? I had long felt that the season's robberies were the work
of many hands. Chance had now marked for me one pair; but it was vastly
more important to know the others. The punishment of the woman would
scarce stop the widespread conspiracy; the arrest of her for the
possession of a crescent brooch, hid suspiciously it is true, but a
brooch of a pattern which abounded in every jeweller's shop from
Kensington to Temple Bar, would have been consummate lunacy. Of course,
I could have taken cab to Scotland Yard, and have told my tale; but with
no other support, how far would that have availed me? If the history of
the surpassingly strange case were to be written, I knew that I must
write it, and lose no moment in the work.

I had now got a sufficient grip upon the whole situation to act
decisively, and my first step was to re-enter the ball-room, and take a
partner for the next waltz. We had made some turns before I discovered
that Mrs Kavanagh was again in the room, dancing with her usual dash,
and seemingly in no way moved by the mishap. As we passed in the press,
she even smiled at me, saying, 'I've set full sail again'; and her whole
bearing convinced me of her belief that I had seen nothing.

At the end of my dance my own partner, a pretty little girl in pink,
left me with the remark, 'You're awfully stupid to-night! I ask you if
you've seen _Manon Lescaut,_ and the only thing you say is, "The panel
buttons up, I thought so".' This convinced me that it was dangerous to
dance again, and I waited in the room only until the supper was ready,
and Mrs Kavanagh passed me, making for the dining-room, on the arm of
General Sharard. I had loitered to see what jewels she wore upon her
dress; and when I had made a note of them, I slipped from the front door
of the house unobserved, and took a hansom to my place in Bond Street.

At the second ring of the bell my watchman opened the door to me; and
while he stood staring with profound surprise, I walked straight to one
of the jewel cases in which our cheaper jewels are kept, and took
therefrom a spray of diamonds, and hooked it to the inside of my coat.
Then I sent the man up stairs to awaken Abel, and in five minutes my
servant was with me, though he wore only his trousers and his shirt.

'Abel,' said I, 'there's good news for you. I'm on the path of the gang
we're wanting.'

'Good God, sir!' cried he, 'you don't mean that!'

'Yes,' said I, 'there's a woman named Sibyl Kavanagh in it to begin
with, and she's helped herself to a couple of diamond sprays, and a
pendant of rubies at Lady Faber's to-night. One of the sprays I know
she's got; if I could trace the pendant to her, the case would begin to
look complete.'

'Whew!' he ejaculated, brightening up at the prospect of business. 'I
knew there was a woman in it all along--but this one, why, she's a
regular flier, ain't she, sir?'

'We'll find out her history presently. I'm going straight back to
Portman Square now. Follow me in a hansom, and when you get to the
house, wait inside my brougham until I come. But before you do that, run
round to Marlborough Street police-station and ask them if we can have
ten or a dozen men ready to mark a house in Bayswater some time between
this and six o'clock to-morrow morning.'

'You're going to follow her home then?'

'Exactly, and if my wits can find a way I'm going to be her guest for
ten minutes after she quits Lady Faber's. They're sure to let you have
the men either at Marlborough Street or at the Harrow Road station. This
business has been a disgrace to them quite long enough.'

'That's so, sir; King told me yesterday that he'd bury his head in the
sand if something didn't turn up soon. You haven't given me the exact
address though.'

'Because I haven't got it. I only know that the woman lives somewhere
near St Stephen's Church--she sits under, or on, one of the curates
there. If you can get her address from her coachman, do so. But go and
dress and be in Portman Square at the earliest possible moment.'

It was now very near one o'clock, indeed the hour struck as I passed the
chapel in Orchard Street; and when I came into the square I found my own
coachman waiting with the brougham at the corner by Baker Street. I told
him, before I entered the house, to expect Abel; and not by any chance
to draw up at Lady Faber's. Then I made my way quietly to the ball-room
and observed Mrs Kavanagh--I will not say dancing, but hurling herself
through the last figure of the lancers. It was evident that she did not
intend to quit yet awhile; and I left her to get some supper, choosing a
seat near to the door of the dining-room, so that any one passing must
be seen by me. To my surprise, I had not been in the room ten minutes
when she suddenly appeared in the hall, unattended, and her cloak
wrapped round her; but she passed without perceiving me; and I, waiting
until I heard the hall door close, went out instantly and got my wraps.
Many of the guests had left already, but a few carriages and cabs were
in the square, and a linkman seemed busy in the distribution of
unlimited potations. It occurred to me that if Abel had not got the
woman's address, this man might give it to me, and I put the plain
question to him.

'That lady who just left,' said I, 'did she have a carriage or a cab ?'

'Oh, you mean Mrs Kevenner,' he answered thickly, 'she's a keb, she is,
allus takes a hansom, sir; 192, Westbourne Park; I don't want to ask
when I see her, sir.'

'Thank you,' said I, 'she has dropped a piece of jewellery in the hall,
and I thought I would drive round and return it to her.'

He looked surprised, at the notion, perhaps, of any one returning
anything found in a London ball-room; but I left him with his
astonishment and entered my carriage. There I found Abel crouching down
under the front seat, and he met me with a piteous plea that the woman
had no coachman, and that he had failed to obtain her address.

'Never mind that,' said I, as we drove off sharply, 'what did they say
at the station?'

'They wanted to bring a force of police round, and arrest every one in
the house, sir. I had trouble enough to hold them in, I'm sure. But I
said that we'd sit down and watch if they made any fuss, and then they
gave in. It's agreed now that a dozen men will be at the Harrow Road
station at your call till morning. They've a wonderful confidence in
you, sir.'

'It's a pity they haven't more confidence in themselves--but anyway, we
are in luck. The woman's address is 192, Westbourne Park, and I seem to
remember that it is a square.'

'I'm sure of it,' said he; 'it's a round square in the shape of an
oblong, and one hundred and ninety two is at the side near Durham
something or other; we can watch it easily from the palings.'

After this, ten minutes' drive brought us to the place, and I found it
as he had said, the 'square' being really a triangle. Number one hundred
and ninety-two was a big house, its outer points gone much to decay, but
lighted on its second and third floors; though so far as I could see,
for the blinds of the drawing-room were up, no one was moving. This did
not deter me, however, and, taking my stand with Abel at the corner
where two great trees gave us perfect shelter, we waited silently for
many minutes, to the astonishment of the constable upon the beat, with
whom I soon settled; and to his satisfaction.

'Ah,' said he, 'I knew they was rum 'uns all along; they owe fourteen
pounds for milk, and their butcher ain't paid; young men going in all
night, too--why, there's one of them there now.'

I looked through the trees at his word, and saw that he was right. A
youth in an opera hat and a black coat was upon the doorstep of the
house; and as the light of a street lamp fell upon his face, I
recognized him. He was the boy who had eaten of the jam tarts so
plentifully at Lady Faber's--the youth with whom Sibyl Kavanagh had
pretended to have no acquaintance when she talked to me in the
conservatory. And at the sight of him, I knew that the moment had come.

'Abel,' I said, 'it's time you went. Tell the men to bring a short
ladder with them. They'll have to come in by the balcony--but only when
I make a sign. The signal will be the cracking of the glass of that lamp
you can see upon the table there. Did you bring my pistol?'

'Would I forget that?' he asked; 'I brought you two, and look out! for
you may want them.'

'I know that,' said I, 'but I depend upon you. Get back at the earliest
possible moment, and don't act until I give the signal. It will mean
that the clue is complete.'

He nodded his head, and disappeared quickly in the direction where the
carriage was; but I went straight up to the house, and knocked loudly
upon the door. To my surprise, it was opened at once by a thick-set man
in livery, who did not appear at all astonished to see me.

'They're upstairs, sir, will you go up?' said he.

'Certainly,' said I, taking him at his word. 'Lead the way.'

This request made him hesitate.

'I beg your pardon,' said he, 'I think I have made a mistake--I'll speak
to Mrs Kavanagh.'

Before I could answer he had run up the stairs nimbly; but I was quick
after him; and when I came upon the landing, I could see into the front
drawing-room, where there sat the woman herself, a small and oldish man
with long black whiskers, and the youth who had just come into the room.
But the back room which gave off from the other with folding-doors, was
empty; and there was no light in it. All this I perceived in a momentary
glance, for no sooner had the serving-man spoken to the woman, than she
pushed the youth out upon the balcony, and came hurriedly to the
landing, closing the door behind her.

'Why, Mr Sutton,' she cried, when she saw me, 'this is a surprise; I was
just going to bed.'

'I was afraid you would have been already gone,' said I with the
simplest smile possible, 'but I found a diamond spray in Lady Faber's
hall just after you had left. The footman said it must be yours, and as
I am going out of town to-morrow, I thought I would risk leaving it
tonight.'

I handed to her as I spoke the spray of diamonds I had taken from my own
show-case in Bond Street; but while she examined it she shot up at me a
quick searching glance from her bright eyes, and her thick sensual lips
were closed hard upon each other. Yet, in the next instant, she laughed
again, and handed me back the jewel.

'I'm indeed very grateful to you,' she exclaimed, 'but I've just put my
spray in its case; you want to give me someone else's property.'

'Then it isn't yours?' said I, affecting disappointment. 'I'm really
very sorry for having troubled you.'

'It is I that should be sorry for having brought you here,' she cried.
'Won't you have a brandy and seltzer or something before you go?'

'Nothing whatever, thanks,' said I. 'Let me apologize again for having
disturbed you--and wish you "Goodnight".'

She held out her hand to me, seemingly much reassured; and as I began to
descend the stairs, she re-entered the drawing-room for the purpose, I
did not doubt, of getting the man off the balcony. The substantial
lackey was then waiting in the hall to open the door for me; but I went
down very slowly, for in truth the whole of my plan appeared to have
failed; and at that moment I was without the veriest rag of an idea. My
object in coming to the house had been to trace, and if possible to lay
hands upon the woman's associates, taking her, as I hoped, somewhat by
surprise; yet though I had made my chain more complete, vital links were
missing; and I stood no nearer to the forging of them. That which I had
to ask myself, and to answer in the space of ten seconds, was the
question, 'Now, or to-morrow?'--whether I should leave the house without
effort, and wait until the gang betrayed itself again; or make some bold
stroke which would end the matter there and then. The latter course was
the one I chose. The morrow, said I, may find these people in Paris or
in Belgium; there never may be such a clue again as that of the ruby
pendant--there never may be a similar opportunity of taking at least
three of those for whom we had so long hunted. And with this thought a
whole plan of action suddenly leaped up in my mind; and I acted upon it,
silently and swiftly, and with a readiness which to this day I wonder
at.

I now stood at the hall-door, which the lackey held open. One searching
look at the man convinced me that my design was a sound one. He was
obtuse, patronizing--but probably honest. As we faced each other I
suddenly took the door-handle from him, and banged the door loudly,
remaining in the hall. Then I clapped my pistol to his head (though for
this offence I surmize that a judge might have given me a month), and I
whispered fiercely to him:

'This house is surrounded by police; if you say a word I'll give you
seven years as an accomplice of the woman upstairs, whom we are going to
arrest. When she calls out, answer that I'm gone, and then come back to
me for instructions. If you do as I tell you, you shall not be
charged--otherwise, you go to jail.'

At this speech the poor wretch paled before me, and shook so that I
could feel the tremor all down the arm of his which I held.

'I--I won't speak, sir,' he gasped. 'I won't, I do assure you--to think
as I should have served such folk.'

'Then hide me, and be quick about it--in this room here, it seems dark.
Now run upstairs and say I'm gone.'

I had stepped into a little breakfast-room at the back of the
dining-room, and there had gone unhesitatingly under a round table. The
place was absolutely dark, and was a vantage ground, since I could see
there from the whole of the staircase; but before the footman could
mount the stairs, the woman came half-way down them, and, looking over
the hall, she asked him:

'Is that gentleman gone?'

'Just left, mum,' he replied.

'Then go to bed, and never let me see you admit a stranger like that
again.'

She went up again at this, and he turned to me, asking:

'What shall I do now, sir? I'll do anything if you'll speak for me, sir;
I've got twenty years' kerecter from Lord Walley; to think as she's a
bad 'un--it's hardly creditable.'

'I shall speak for you,' said I, 'if you do exactly what I tell you. Are
any more men expected now?'

'Yes, there's two more; the capting and the clergymin, pretty clergymin
he must be, too.'

'Never mind that; wait and let them in. Then go upstairs and turn the
light out on the staircase as if by accident. After that you can go to
bed.'

'Did you say the police was 'ere?' he asked in his hoarse whisper; and I
said:

'Yes, they're everywhere, on the roof, and in the street, and on the
balcony. If there's the least resistance, the house will swarm with
them.'

What he would have said to this I cannot tell, for at that moment there
was another knock upon the front door, and he opened it instantly. Two
men, one in clerical dress, and one, a very powerful man, in a Newmarket
coat, went quickly upstairs, and the butler followed them. A moment
later the gas went out on the stairs; and there was no sound but the
echo of the talk in the front drawing-room.

The critical moment in my night's work had now come. Taking off my
boots, and putting my revolver at the half-cock, I crawled up the stairs
with the step of a cat, and entered the back drawing-room. One of the
folding doors of this was ajar, so that a false step would probably have
cost me my life--and I could not possibly tell if the police were really
in the street, or only upon their way. But it was my good luck that the
men talked loudly, and seemed actually to be disputing. The first thing
I observed on looking through the open door was that the woman had left
the four to themselves. Three of them stood about the table whereon the
lamp was; the dumpy man with the black whiskers sat in his arm-chair.
But the most pleasing sight of all was that of a large piece of
cotton-wool spread upon the table and almost covered with brooches,
lockets, and sprays of diamonds; and to my infinite satisfaction I saw
Lady Faber's pendant of rubies lying conspicuous even amongst the wealth
of jewels which the light showed.

There then was the clue; but how was it to be used? It came to me
suddenly that four consummate rogues such as these would not be unarmed.
Did I step into the room, they might shoot me at the first sound; and if
the police had not come, there would be the end of it. Had opportunity
been permitted to me, I would, undoubtedly, have waited five or ten
minutes to assure myself that Abel was in the street without. But this
was not to be. Even as I debated the point, a candle's light shone upon
the staircase; and in another moment Mrs Kavanagh herself stood in the
doorway watching me. For one instant she stood, but it served my
purpose; and as a scream rose upon her lips, and I felt my heart
thudding against my ribs, I threw open the folding doors, and
deliberately shot down the glass of the lamp which had cast the aureola
of light upon the stolen jewels.

As the glass flew, for my reputation as a pistol shot was not belied in
this critical moment, Mrs Kavanagh ran in a wild fit of hysterical
screaming to her bedroom above--but the four men turned with loud cries
to the door where they had seen me; and as I saw them coming, I prayed
that Abel might be there. This thought need not have occurred to me.
Scarce had the men taken two steps when the glass of the balcony windows
was burst in with a crash, and the whole room seemed to fill with
police.

                       *        *        *

I cannot now remember precisely the sentences which were passed upon the
great gang (known to police history as the Westbourne Park gang) of
jewel thieves; but the history of that case is curious enough to be
worthy of mention. The husband of the woman Kavanagh--he of the black
whiskers--was a man of the name of Whyte, formerly a manager in the
house of James Thorndike, the Universal Provider near the Tottenham
Court Road. Whyte's business had been to provide all things needful for
dances; and, though it astonishes me to write it, he had even found
dancing men for ladies whose range of acquaintance was narrow. In the
course of business, he set up for himself eventually; and as he worked,
the bright idea came to him, why not find as guests men who may snap up,
in the heat and the security of the dance, such unconsidered trifles as
sprays, pendants, and lockets. To this end he married, and his wife
being a clever woman who fell in with his idea, she--under the name of
Kavanagh--made the acquaintance of a number of youths whose business it
was to dance; and eventually wormed herself into many good houses. The
trial brought to light the extraordinary fact that no less than
twenty-three men and eight women were bound in this amazing conspiracy,
and that Kavanagh acted as the buyer of the property they stole, giving
them a third of the profits, and swindling them outrageously. He, I
believe, is now taking the air at Portland; and the other young men are
finding in the exemplary exercise of picking oakum, work for idle hands
to do.

As for Mrs Kavanagh, she was dramatic to the end of it; and, as I learnt
from King, she insisted on being arrested in bed.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


