
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Cafe of Terror
Author: E. Phillips Oppenheim
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0608961.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: November 2006
Date most recently updated: December 2007

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Cafe of Terror
Author: E. Phillips Oppenheim





The Marquis always talked very bad English when he was angry, and this
morning he was very angry indeed. Climbing up narrow and precipitous
paths upon a surface of loose stones, pushing his way occasionally
through brambles and undergrowth, and looking downwards from heights,
which always made him giddy, had been undertakings which had combined to
incense him. He was not dressed or built for such mad escapades. The
sight of Madelon, bare-headed, and laughing, having the air of one to
whom such excursions, instead of being a torture, were a keen pleasure,
only irritated him, whereas the final note of exasperation he discovered
in the pleasant good temper of Mr. Samuel T. Billingham, their guide and
host, who, with a huge cigar in his mouth, was walking with springy
steps and unabated cheerfulness up the path which the Marquis had
passionately declared to be only fit for goats and idiots.

"I can no further make this absurd promenade," the Marquis announced,
sinking on to a heap of stones and dabbing with a scented
pocket-handkerchief drops of moisture upon his forehead, which must not
be allowed to reach his eyebrows. "It is an absurdity! I have a pain of
the stomach, a pain of the knees, a pain of the back. It is not for this
I came. Where is the automobile?"

"Poor uncle!" Madelon sympathised. "I had forgotten that you were not
used to walking. You should have lived in England as I have done. But
the view--you must admit that the view is marvellous!"

The comments of the Marquis upon the view were delivered in fluent and
sacrilegious French. He displayed an acquaintance with the various forms
of blasphemy peculiar to his language which moved even Mr. Billingham to
wondering admiration.

"When I feel better," he concluded, after a moment's electric pause, "I
shall apologise. At present I will only say that the view from the
window of my salon, which takes in the Casino and all that glorious
sea, is better worth having."

"Less than a kilometre to go," Mr. Billingham declared. "I reckon we
shall strike the main road just beyond that clump of firs, and that's
where I told the car to pick us up. Another quarter of an hour, Marquis,
and we shall be in St. Félix."

"If one could only drink something!" the latter observed pettishly, as
he rose to his feet. "I miss my morning aperitif."

"That's coming to you, sure," Mr. Billingham promised. "I've done this
tramp before, and unless I'm mistaken there's a little café where this
path joins the cart track."

The prospect was sufficiently encouraging to induce the Marquis to
struggle to his feet. They clambered another fifty yards or so up the
stony path and found themselves in a rough track which had evidently
been made by the carting of timber from the other side of the ravine. A
little way along there was a small white-plastered building, to which
Mr. Billingham pointed.

"The Café du Forêt!" he exclaimed. "The worst ever, so far as I
remember, but a Dubonnet won't poison us."

The Marquis almost smiled.

"A Dubonnet will be acceptable," he admitted. "The place appears
poverty-stricken, but if one can secure an unopened bottle----"

"We'll find that," Mr. Billingham interrupted confidently.

A few minutes' further climb brought them to the café. It was small,
dilapidated and uninviting. Nevertheless it proclaimed itself in rudely
painted black letters to be a restaurant where "Vins et Consommations"
were to be obtained. There were three iron tables outside with a couple
of chairs at each, but no sign of life. The door stood open and his two
companions followed Mr. Billingham inside. There was no one behind the
little counter, no one in the rude little compartment with its sanded
floor and benches in place of chairs. There were bottles upon the
shelves, however, and a tumbler half full of brandy upon the counter.
Mr. Billingham raised his voice and the glasses around shook.

"Hallo there!" he shouted.

"Allo, allo!" the Marquis echoed. "N'y a-t-il personne ici pour nous
servir?"

There was a stolid, unsympathetic lack of response. They waited for a
moment, then Mr. Billingham opened the door of the room behind the bar
and glanced around. It was a rough-looking kitchen, with a stone floor
and a few clumsy articles of furniture. A string of onions, a scraggy
piece of meat, and a rabbit hung down from iron hooks in the ceiling.
There were pots and dishes upon the table, but no fire or any sign of
recent occupation. Mr. Billingham raised his voice again without result,
opened still another door, and called up a flight of flimsy stairs--also
without result. Then he returned to his companions.

"There is no one about at all," he announced.

"You might try outside," Madelon suggested.

Outside there was no garden but a little clearing, a rudely constructed
shed built of pine logs from which the bark had not been stripped, and a
lean-to shelter, with a corrugated iron roof, against the wall. Mr.
Billingham again, in stentorian tones, invited the presence of the
missing innkeeper and again without response. He returned to the bar.

"Deserted!" he exclaimed.

"They were preparing for a fête at the small village we passed through
last," Madelon remarked. "Perhaps the people have gone there, or the man
may work in the woods."

The Marquis smiled. He had been studying the labels upon the bottles.

"At least," he pointed out, "they have left a bottle of Dubonnet.
Produce that excellent corkscrew of yours, my friend Billingham. We will
serve ourselves and leave the money."

They opened the bottle of Dubonnet which the Marquis had dragged down
from the shelf, found some thick wine-glasses, and seated themselves
before one of the rude tables outside. Madelon gave a little exclamation
of relief as they passed out into the pine-scented sunshine.

"That place gave me the shivers," she declared. "It seemed so very
empty, so very silent."

"It's a lonely spot," Mr. Billingham agreed, pouring out the Dubonnet.
"They seem to have let off felling the timber round here, and I guess
that took the trade away."

"So long as they are absent," the Marquis said, "one owes them gratitude
that they left the place open. Never have I tasted Dubonnet with a
better flavour. Tell me, my friend Billingham, how much further of this
abominable promenade before we reach the automobile?"

"Not more than half a kilometre," Mr. Billingham assured him. "There's a
little path which leads straight up to the road from the cart track.
There we shall find the automobile. In a few minutes more we shall be in
St. Félix. After that--the déjeuner!"

The Marquis breathed a little sigh of content and helped himself once
more from the bottle. Madelon, who had set her glass down empty, was
fidgeting about as though anxious to start.

"Hungry?" Mr. Billingham inquired.

She shook her head.

"I have taken a dislike to this place," she confided. "Am I
superstitious, I wonder? I have a terrible feeling about it."

The Marquis was sympathetic but entirely comfortable and not disposed to
hurry. He lit a cigarette and leaned back in his chair.

"I understand," he murmured. "A deserted inn on the edge of the forest!
There are all the materials here for drama. There was a story I once
read----"

He broke off abruptly and the cigarette fell from his fingers. Mr.
Billingham sprang to his feet. Madelon, who had wandered a few yards
away from them and turned back towards the house, was standing suddenly
rigid, suddenly pale. The cry which had startled them had escaped from
her lips. She pointed to the window above the door.

"There was a face there!" she cried. "Some one up in the room!"

Mr. Billingham remained composed.

"Well, I guess that isn't so terrible after all," he observed. "I dare
say there's some one ill there. Who was it--a man or a woman?"

"I do not know," Madelon answered faintly. "It was--just a face!"

"Seems to have given you a shock," Mr. Billingham continued. "Sit down,
Miss Madelon, and drink half a glass more of this stuff. Guess I'd
better hunt round and see if there's any help wanted."

Madelon--young woman of nerve and courage though she was--staggered into
a chair and was utterly unable to raise to her lips the glass which her
uncle hastily filled. Mr. Billingham disappeared inside the building. In
about five minutes he returned.

"There's only one room upstairs," he announced, "and there ain't a soul
in it."

"But I saw some one," Madelon protested.

He strolled a yard or two away and looked back at the window, pausing a
moment to relight his cigar which had gone out.

"Well, there's no one there now," he assured her. "There's only one room
and not a cupboard for a hiding-place. There are two beds--both look as
though they'd been slept in--but there isn't a human being in the
shanty. You can take my word for it."

Madelon looked at him steadfastly. She had drunk some of the Dubonnet
and she was becoming herself again.

"Do you believe, then," she asked, "that I saw the face of some one who
does not exist?"

"I shouldn't say you were the sort who saw spooks," Mr. Billingham
admitted. "All I say is, there's no one there now."

"You must surely have realised, my dear Madelon," the Marquis
intervened, "whether the face was the face of a man or a woman."

"I should have said that it was the face of a young man," Madelon
replied, "but it might have been the face of a girl. There was a mass of
black hair. The face itself was smooth. It was the eyes that were
horrible."

"You don't say!" Mr. Billingham murmured with tolerant sympathy. "Kind
of scared, were they?"

Madelon rose to her feet.

"Please let us go now," she begged. "I cannot talk about it any more. I
can only assure you of one thing. Something terrible has happened here.
Please, Mr. Billingham!"

"We'll get right along," was the prompt response. "Ten francs will
square us for the bottle of Dubonnet, I guess--ten francs and what's
left of the bottle. I'll put it underneath the glass--see? Now, we're
right! Just a yard or two through the trees and then we'll leave this
place behind us."

"I hope," Madelon murmured as they passed swiftly back to the cart
track, "that I may be able to forget it."

The Marquis smiled.

"Pooh, pooh, my child!" he exclaimed. "You are too sensitive, too
emotional! Material discomforts you scoff at. A fancy sometimes tortures
you. Behold, the good news!"

He pointed upwards. At the end of the path was the curling main road and
by the side of it the automobile Mr. Billingham had hired for their
day's excursion. No vehicle before had ever appealed so greatly to the
Marquis.

"We've struck it right after all," Mr. Billingham declared with
satisfaction. "Gee, how hot the sun is out here! Lunch on the terrace in
twenty minutes, Miss Madelon. Now, let's forget that dirty little shanty
and its spook!"



The spook was not so easy to forget. Madelon, with Mr. Billingham as her
escort, was on her way that evening from the Casino to Ciro's when she
suddenly gripped her companion's arm.

"Look," she cried, in a tone vibrant with absolute terror. "Look! The
boy at that table!"

Mr. Billingham's eyes followed her gesture. The young man was certainly
an unusual sight in such surroundings. His clothes, although perfectly
new, were clumsily fashioned and of the sort worn on fête days by the
peasants. His hat was pushed to the back of his head, and, although it
was of the sombrero order affected by the mountaineers of the district,
it failed to conceal the masses of black hair which gave him almost a
grotesque appearance. His complexion was the usual burnt olive of the
Provençal labourer. It was again his expression which arrested. His eyes
were large and black, without either the vacancy or the humour of the
peasant on a holiday. They looked neither at the people who passed, the
trees and flowers of the plaza, nor at the bottle of wine which stood
half-empty by his side. They seemed to be looking at something which, if
it existed at all, existed far away.

"That," Madelon said, "was the face I saw at the upstairs window of that
place this morning."

Her hand was clutching nervously at his arm. Mr. Billingham patted it
gently.

"Say, this boy has got on your nerves some," he declared. "I'll go
across and have a talk to him. Sit down and wait for me."

"I think I will for a moment," Madelon acquiesced.

She seated herself on one of the benches by the side of the pavement.
Mr. Billingham crossed the road and addressed the boy in hesitating but
comprehensible French.

"Do you belong to the inn up near St. Félix?" he inquired. "The young
lady and I were there this morning."

The boy stared at his questioner for a moment with parted lips and
terrified expression. He made absolutely no reply, however.

"We could not find any one there," Mr. Billingham continued, speaking
with laborious care. "We hoped there was nothing wrong."

The boy broke out into a stream of rapid, unintelligible speech, to
which Mr. Billingham listened in ever-increasing confusion. He turned
round to find Madelon by his side.

"Say, this young goat-herd has got hold of a lingo of his own," he
complained. "I don't know as any one but a monkey could tell what he's
chattering about. Seems kind of annoyed with me, but I can't get a word
of it."

"It is the dialect of the Italians here," Madelon explained. "Let me
try."

She spoke to him patiently. The boy only shook his head. Presently he
poured out another glass of wine and drank it. Then he sat quite still,
stolid and inattentive. He took no notice of Madelon's questions. He
showed no sign of understanding a word she said. In the end she was
seized by a sudden revulsion. She tugged at her companion's arm.

"Come away!" she begged. "He will not reply. He pretends not to
understand me, though I believe that he does. Let us leave him."

"Guess you're right," Mr. Billingham assented. "He's a crazy loon, if
ever there was one, or he wouldn't speak such gibberish. Anyway, it's
not our business."

They passed on. The young man looked after them sullenly and helped
himself to more wine. Ten minutes later, when Mr. Billingham, obeying an
unaccountable impulse, chose a moment when Madelon was talking to some
acquaintances and hurried back, the chair was empty. The young man was
gone.

"Anyway," Mr. Billingham murmured to himself, struggling against a
curious feeling of uneasiness, "it ain't our affair."



Notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Billingham had twice declared that
whatever trouble there might be or have been at the little inn on the
edge of the forest was not his affair, it was barely ten o'clock in the
morning when he left the automobile which he had hired in the Square at
Monte Carlo, clambered down the steep path, made his way along the cart
track, pushed through the clump of trees and found himself before the
café. There was no smoke emerging from the chimney, and Mr. Billingham
gave a little start of surprise as he saw on the table, in front of the
still open door, the half-consumed bottle of Dubonnet and the ten-franc
note under one of the glasses.

"I guess passers-by round here are pretty scarce," he ruminated. "Seems
queer that whoever quit the place didn't trouble to lock up. Left in a
hurry, perhaps."

Mr. Billingham would doubtless have scorned the suggestion that he
talked to himself for the fact of any pleasure he might derive from
hearing his own voice, and yet it was without a doubt true that the
uneasy feeling of the day before had returned to an even larger extent.
He pushed open the door. The half-emptied tumbler was still upon the
counter. Some little disarrangement of the bottles upon the shelf,
effected by their removal of the bottle of Dubonnet, still existed. He
threw open the door leading to the kitchen and called out:

"Hallo there!"

There was no reply. He mounted the stairs with footsteps which he was
half-ashamed to admit were reluctant ones. The bedroom was as empty as
it had been on the previous day. There was no place to hide anywhere--no
other room. As he descended, however, he realised that it was perfectly
possible for the owner of the face whom Madelon had seen there to have
escaped by the back door and reached the wood in the matter of a very
few seconds. He returned to the kitchen. Here he noticed for the first
time that by the side of the fireplace was a clumsy framework door,
which looked as though it might have led into a pantry or cupboard. He
moved towards it and raised the latch. Before he threw the door open, he
knew. When he closed it again--in the space of a second or two--there
were great beads of perspiration upon his forehead. The colour had left
his cheeks and the blood seemed to have been drained from body. He
staggered out into the bar, gripped the counter for a moment, saw a
bottle of Martell's brandy on the bottom row of the shelf, seized it,
made his faltering way outside, knocked off its neck against the top of
one of the iron tables, and drank. ... Mr. Billingham was a strong man
and his recovery was prompt. Nevertheless, he was breathing heavily as
he hastened up the hill to where his automobile was waiting.

"Drive to the Mairie at St. Félix," he ordered....

Arrived at the Mairie--a small wistaria-covered building on the
outskirts of the straggling village of St. Félix--Mr. Billingham was
ushered at once by a gendarme into a bare little apartment with
whitewashed walls and a row of benches, in which a very formal-looking
gentleman with a closely-trimmed black beard, very smoothly brushed
hair, and gold-rimmed pince-nez, was seated at a table, signing
documents. His work for the morning had consisted of adjudicating upon a
highly important case of fowl stealing, and he looked with some surprise
at his visitor's precipitate entrance. Mr. Billingham's opening
statement was in far from lucid English. The magistrate, with a puzzled
expression, waved him to a seat.

"Comment, monsieur?" he exclaimed.

Mr. Billingham pulled himself together. His French, though not rapid,
was fairly precise, and he had no difficulty in making himself
understood.

"A woman has been murdered at a little café at the edge of the forest,"
he announced.

The magistrate gasped. The gendarme gasped.

"Continue, monsieur," the former begged.

Mr Billingham told his story. The magistrate gave him his entire
attention. It was a great day, this! A murder! Obviously a murder, in
his district! He began to make notes of Mr. Billingham's statement. He
was friendly but official. It was quite hopeless for him to conceal the
fact that the news had filled him with pleasurable interest. It had been
the secret desire of his life to have the handling of such a case.

"I will accompany you to the inn myself at once, monsieur," he
announced, rising to his feet. "You can accommodate a gendarme, perhaps,
on the front of your car.... Let the Court remain open till my return,"
he directed a subordinate. "Tell me again your story as we proceed,
monsieur."

Mr Billingham went through the few facts again. In response to his own
inquiries the magistrate gave him certain information.

"The inn," he said, "was kept by a very respectable, good man, of the
name of Pierre Anson. He lived there with his wife, the woman who
without a doubt is the victim, and his nephew, a young man of whom one
hears not too much of good. The wife, it is reported, had
savings--savings of some account--and the nephew knew it. Three days ago
news came to Anson of the death of a relative in Marseilles. This I know
because he came to me for information as to the burying of the relative
and as to his journey. He set off last Monday morning. He was expecting
to return to-night. He left alone his wife and this nephew. One fears to
reflect what may have happened!"

Mr. Billingham sighed, because he was a kind-hearted man, and because a
vision of that flashing knife of the guillotine is terrible to such.
Nevertheless it was his duty.

"Last night," he confided, "the young man, who apparently was the nephew
of Pierre Anson, was drinking wine at the Café de Paris in Monte Carlo.
He was pointed out to me by the young lady, who declared that his was
the face she saw at the window."

The magistrate nodded gravely.

"It is a crime," he said, "in effect simple, not uncommon amongst this
race of people. When heated with wine and drunk with the desire of
pleasure, the shedding of blood is nothing. I, who tell you this, know."

They arrived at their destination. The magistrate and the gendarme made
their way to the little room. Mr. Billingham sat outside. He had no soul
for horrors. It was an hour before they rejoined him. The magistrate was
carrying his notebook in his hand.

"All is clear," he announced. "The savings of the poor woman have
disappeared. To-night, or to-morrow at the latest, the young man will be
in our hands. Your name and address, if you please, monsieur. You will
attend the Court?"

"Certainly," Mr. Billingham promised.

"The young man," the magistrate continued, "will have had two nights of
that wild pleasure of which he has lain awake, here in this place of
tranquillity, and dreamed. Afterwards--well--he may escape with the
penitentiary. One knows little of his age."

Mr. Billingham looked up at the blank window. The silence which brooded
over the place remained unbroken. A gendarme, having closed the door,
seated himself outside.

"Pierre Anson will arrive by the night train," the magistrate remarked.
"It will be a sad home-coming for him."

"Better," Mr. Billingham rejoined, with a little shiver, "than if he had
found the house empty and opened that door, as I did."



The most pathetic sight in the bare, whitewashed little room of the
Mairie on the first morning of the examination was Pierre Anson, the
woodman. The tears streamed down his brown, wrinkled face as the
magistrate addressed his first few kindly questions. He had, at one
time, as was evident, been a man of great stature and strength. Now he
seemed shrunken up, stricken with the horror of his home-coming.

"Your wife had savings, Pierre Anson?" the magistrate asked him.

"She was a thrifty woman," was the tremulous reply. "She had always a
stocking."

"Do you know how much was in it?"

"She never told me."

"Did your nephew--the young man between the gendarmes there--the young
man whom you trusted alone with your wife--did he know?"

"I cannot tell," Pierre Anson answered. "He was always wanting money."

"You have been to Marseilles to bury a relative--is it not so?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"You thought it safe to leave this youth, of whose character we hear
little that is good, alone with your wife in such a desolate spot?"

"She was his aunt," the man announced, with a little sob. "How would I
dream of anything so horrible?"

The magistrate bent over his papers. Mr. Billingham, seated by his side,
watched the shaft of sunlight which had found its way through the
cobwebbed windows and had fallen upon the boy's face. Madelon, who had
also been invited by the magistrate to occupy a chair near him,
scribbled something on a piece of paper and passed it to her neighbour.
He glanced at it and passed it on to the magistrate, who studied it
through his pince-nez with pursed lips. Finally, with a little shrug of
the shoulders, he twiddled it between his fingers.

"Where did you stay in Marseilles, Pierre Anson?" he asked suddenly.

The woodman lifted his head and stared uncomprehendingly at his
questioner.

"I asked you where you stayed in Marseilles," the magistrate repeated.

Pierre Anson shook his head.

"I do not remember," he said. "It was a small lodging-house down by the
quay."

"You do not remember?" the magistrate echoed, in a tone of some
surprise. "Is that not strange, Pierre Anson?"

"It was somewhere near where my cousin lay dead," the man answered, a
little sullenly. "I could find the place--the name I never knew."

The magistrate's right arm suddenly shot out.

"Or is it that you are lying, Pierre Anson?" he thundered. "Is it that
you yourself, before you left home in the small hours of that Tuesday
morning, murdered your wife and stole her savings, forced two of the
notes on that half-witted youth, persuaded him to buy clothes and go
down to Monte Carlo, and went yourself to Nice--your rendezvous at
Nice--to your rendezvous with Lucie Bérard?"

The man half-rose to his feet. His eyes seemed suddenly bloodshot. He
swayed about as though striving to speak.

"Bring the woman," the magistrate ordered.

Pierre Anson glanced fearfully towards the door. A woman in the care of
a gendarme entered. They looked at one another across the room--the man
and the woman--and one understood.

"The money of which you robbed your wife, Pierre Anson," the magistrate
continued, "was found upon this woman. You have visited her month by
month in Nice. You would have thrust the burden of this crime upon your
nephew. You yourself are the murderer! Do you confess?"

A cry rang through the Court--not from the man, Pierre Anson, who was
indeed incapable of speech, whose hands were fighting the air, who
fought against unconsciousness, but from the boy who stood between the
gendarmes. His eyes were fixed upon the woman who had entered the Court
Room, His indifference had vanished. His eyes again were lit with fear.

"Mother!" he cried.

"It is I!" she answered.

The boy turned towards the magistrate.

"It was I who killed the woman," he pleaded. "No one else knows anything
about it."

"You are a liar and a fool!" the woman declared angrily. "It was he, the
bungler there," she added, pointing to Pierre Anson. "And there is the
money."

She dashed a bundle of notes upon the floor and stood with folded arms,
defiant, the incarnation of an evil spirit. A gendarme touched Pierre
Anson upon the shoulder. The proceedings were over.



Afterwards the magistrate entertained his two distinguished guests with
a bottle of sweet wine and biscuits in his retiring-room. He was well
pleased with the whole business.

"Amongst the lowest classes of our peasants," he explained, "these
family dramas are not uncommon. Pierre Anson, as the story goes now,
loved both sisters. He married the older one--a widow with money. The
rest of the story unfolds itself. Yet Pierre Anson had cunning which few
of these peasants possess. He deceived us all. It is to you, monsieur,"
he added, turning to Mr. Billingham, "that we owe the clue by means of
which we arrived at the truth."

Mr. Billingham shook his head.

"Not to me," he rejoined; "to the young lady."

The magistrate bowed.

"Then might one inquire," he ventured, "what led the young lady to doubt
the lad's guilt?"

Madelon was once more serious.

"Something in his eyes," she confided, with a little shudder of
reminiscence; "something which was there and something which was nor
there."

The magistrate raised his glass and bowed first to Madelon, then to Mr.
Billingham.

"Something in his eyes," he repeated. "Well, one reads somewhere in a
lay commentary upon our laws and the discovery of crime, that the born
detective must have an instinct for the truth. Mademoiselle, there is a
great vocation open to you."

Madelon smiled. She sipped her wine, but she remained silent.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


