

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title: The Resurrectionist
Author: Samuel Warren
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0609001.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: November 2006
Date most recently updated: November 2006

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Resurrectionist
Author: Samuel Warren





My gentle reader--start not at learning that I have been, in my time, a
resurrectionist! Let not this appalling word, this humiliating
confession, conjure up in your fancy a throng of vampire-like images and
associatiors, or earn your "Physician's" dismissal from your hearts and
hearths. It is your own groundless fears, my fair trembler!--your own
superstitious prejudices--that have driven me, and will drive many
others of my brethern, to such dreadful doings as those hereafter
detailed. Come, come--let us have one word of reason between us on the
abstract question--and then for my tale. You expect us to cure you of
disease, and yet deny us the only means of learning _how_! You would
have us bring you the ore of skill and experience, yet forbid us to
break the soil or sink a shaft! Is this fair, _fair_ reader? Is this
reasonable?

What I am now going to describe was my first and last exploit in the way
of body-stealing. It was a grotesque if not a ludicrous scene, and
occurred during the period of my "walking the hospitals," as it is
called, which occupied the two seasons immediately after my leaving
Cambridge. A young and rather interesting female was admitted a patient
at the hospital I attended; her case baffled all our skill, and her
symptoms even defied diagnosis. _Now_, it seemed an enlargement of the
heart--now, an ossification--then this, that, and the other; and at last
it was plain we knew nothing at all about the matter--no, not even
whether her disorder was organic or functional, primary or
symptomatic--or whether it _was_ really the heart that was at fault. She
received no benefit at all under the fluctuating schemes of treatment we
pursued, and at length fell into dying circumstances. As soon as her
friends were apprised of her situation, and had an inkling of our
intention to open the body, they insisted on removing her immediately
from the hospital, that she might "die at home."

In vain did Sir ---- and his dressers expostulate vehemently with them,
and represent, in exaggerated terms, the imminent peril attending such a
step. Her two brothers avowed their apprehension of our designs, and
were inflexible in exercising their right of removing their sister. I
used all my rhetoric on the occasion, but in vain; and at last said to
the young men, "Well, if you are afraid only of our _dissecting_ her, we
can get hold of her, if we are so disposed, as easily if she die with
you as with us."

"Well--we'll _troy_ that, measter," replied the elder, while his
Herculean fist oscillated somewhat significantly before my eyes. The
poor girl was removed accordingly to her father's house, which was at a
certain village about five miles from London, and survived her arrival
scarcely ten minutes! We soon contrived to receive intelligence of the
event; and as I and Sir ----'s two dressers had taken great interest in
the case throughout, and felt intense curiosity about the real nature of
the disease, we met together and entered into a solemn compact, that,
come what might, we would have her body out of the ground. A trusty spy
informed us of the time and exact place of the girl's burial; and on
expressing to Sir ---- our determination about the matter, he patted me
on the back, saying, "Ah, my fine fellow!--IF you have SPIRIT
enough--dangerous," etc., etc.

Was it not skilfully said? The baronet further told us, he felt himself
so curious about the matter that if fifty pounds would be of use to us
in furthering our purpose, they were at our service. It needed not this,
nor a glance at the _éclat_ with which the successful issue of
the affair would be attended among our fellow-students, to spur our
resolves.

The notable scheme was finally adjusted at my rooms in the Borough.
M---- and E----, Sir ----'s dressers, and myself, with an
experienced "_grab_"--that is to say, a _professional_
resurrectionist--were to set off from the Borough about nine o'clock the
next evening--which would be the third day after the burial--in a glass
coach provided with all "appliances and means to boot." During the day,
however, our friend the grab suffered so severely from an overnight's
excess as to disappoint us of his invaluable assistance. This unexpected
_contretempts_ nearly put an end to our project; for the few other grabs
we knew were absent on _professional tours_! Luckily, however, I
bethought me of a poor Irish porter--a sort of "ne'er-do-weel" hanger-on
at the hospital--whom I had several times hired to go on errands. This
man I sent for to my room, and, in the presence of my two coadjutors,
persuaded, threatened, and bothered into acquiescence, promising him
half-a-guinea for his evening's work--and as much whisky as he could
drink prudently. As Mr. Tip--that was the name he went by--had some
personal acquaintance with the sick grab, he succeeded in borrowing his
chief tools; with which, in a sack large enough to contain our expected
prize, he repaired to my rooms about nine o'clock, while the coach was
standing at the door. Our Jehu had received a quiet douceur in addition
to the hire of himself and coach.

As soon as we had exhibited sundry doses of Irish cordial to our friend
Tip--under the effects of which he became quite "bouncible," and
_ranted_ about the feat he was to take a prominent part in--and equipped
ourselves in our worst clothes, and white top-coats, we entered the
vehicle--four in number--and drove off. The weather had been exceedingly
capricious all the evening--moonlight, rain, thunder, and lightning,
fitfully alternating. The only thing we were anxious about was the
darkness, to shield us from all possible observation. I must own that,
in analysing the feelings that prompted me to undertake and go through
with this affair, the mere love of adventure operated quite as
powerfully as the wish to benefit the cause of anatomical science. A
midnight expedition to the tombs!--It took our fancy amazingly; and then
Sir ----'s cunning hint about the "danger"--and our "spirit!"

The garrulous Tip supplied us with amusement all the way down--rattle,
rattle, rattle, incessantly; but as soon as we had arrived at that part
of the road where we were to stop, and caught sight of ---- church,
with its hoary steeple--glistening in the fading moonlight, as though it
were standing sentinel over the graves around it, one or which we were
going so rudely to violate--Tip's spirits began to falter a little. He
said little--and that at intervals.

To be very candid with the reader, none of us felt over-much at our
ease. Our expedition began to wear a somewhat hare-brained aspect, and
to be environed with formidable contingencies which we had not taken
sufficiently into our calculations. What, for instance, if the two stout
fellows, the brothers, should be out watching their sister's grave? They
were not likely to stand on much ceremony with us. And then the manual
difficulties! E---- was the only one of us that had ever assisted
at the exhumation of a body--and the rest of us were likely to prove but
bungling workmen. However, we had gone too far to think of retreating.
We none of us _spoke_ our suspicions, but the silence that reigned
within the coach was tolerably significant. In contemplation, however,
of some such contingency we had put a bottle of brandy in the coach
pocket; and before we drew up, had all four of us drunk pretty deeply of
it. At length the coach turned down a by-lane to the left, which led
directly to the churchyard wall; and after moving a few steps down it,
in order to shelter our vehicle from the observation of highway
passengers, the coach stopped, and the driver opened the door.

"Come, Tip," said I, "out with you."

"Get out, did you say, sir? To be sure I will--Och! to be sure I will."
But there was small show of alacrity in his movements as he descended
the steps; for while I was speaking I was interrupted by the solemn
clangour of the church clock announcing the hour of midnight. The sounds
seemed to warn us against what we were going to do.

"'Tis a cowld night, yer honours," said Tip, in an under-tone, as we
successively alighted, and stood together, looking up and down the dark
lane, to see if anything was stirring but ourselves. "'Tis a cowld night
--and--and--and--" he stammered.

"Why, you cowardly old scoundrel," grumbled M----, "are you frightened
already? What's the matter, eh? Hoist up the bag on your shoulders
directly, and lead the way down the lane."

"Och, but yer honours--och! by the mother that bore me, but 'tis a
murtherous cruel thing, I'm thinking, to wake the poor cratur from her
last sleep."

He said this so querulously, that I began to entertain serious
apprehensions, after all, of his defection; so I insisted on his taking
a little more brandy, by way of bringing him up to a par. It was of no
use, however. His reluctance increased every moment--and it even
dispirited _us_. I verily believe the turning of a straw would have
decided us all on jumping into the coach again, and returning home
without accomplishing our errand. Too many of the students, however,
were apprised of our expedition, for us to think of terminating it so
ridiculously. As it were by mutual consent, we stood and paused a few
moments, about half-way down the lane. M---- whistled with infinite
spirit and distinctness; E---- remarked to me that he always
"thought a churchyard at midnight was the gloomiest object imaginable;"
and I talked about _business_--"soon be over"--"shallow grave," etc.,
etc.

"Confound it--what if those two brothers of hers SHOULD be there?" said
M---- abruptly, making a dead stop, and folding his arms on his breast.

"Powerful fellows, both of them!" muttered E----. We resumed our
march--when Tip, our advanced guard--a title he earned by anticipating
our steps about three inches--suddenly stood still, let down the bag
from his shoulders, elevated both hands in a listening attitude, and
exclaimed, "Whisht!--whisht! By my soul, _what_ was that?"

We all paused in silence, looking palely at one another--but could hear
nothing except the drowsy flutter of a bat wheeling away from us a
little overhead.

"Fait--an' wasn't it somebody _spaking_ on the far side o' the hedge I
heard?" whispered Tip.

"Pooh--stuff, you idiot!" I exclaimed, losing my temper. "Come,
M---- and E----, it's high time we had done with all this
cowardly nonsense; and if we mean really to do anything, we must make
haste. 'Tis past twelve--day breaks about four--and it is coming on wet,
you see." Several large drops of rain, pattering heavily among the
leaves and branches, corroborated my words, by announcing a coming
shower, and the air was sultry enough to warrant the expectation of a
thunder-storm. We therefore buttoned up our greatcoats to the chin, and
hurried on to the churchyard wall, which ran across the bottom of the
lane. This wall we had to climb over to get into the churchyard, and it
was not a very high one.

Here Tip annoyed us again. I told him to lay down his bag, mount the
wall, and look over into the yard, to see whether all was clear before
us; and, as far as the light would enable him, to look about for a
new-made grave. Very reluctantly he complied, and contrived to scramble
to the top of the wall. He had hardly time, however, to peer over into
the churchyard, when a fluttering streak of lightning flashed over us,
followed, in a second or two, by a loud burst of thunder. Tip fell in an
instant to the ground, like a cockchafer shaken from an elm-tree, and
lay crossing himself and muttering paternosters. We could scarcely help
laughing at the manner in which he tumbled down, simultaneously with the
flash of lightning. "Now, look ye, gintlemen," said he, still squatting
on the ground, "do you mane to give the poor cratur Christian burial,
when ye've done wid her? An' will you put her back again as ye found
her? 'Case, if you won't, blood an' oons--"

"Hark ye now, Tip," said I sternly, taking out one of a brace of _empty_
pistols I had put into my greatcoat pocket, and presenting it to his
head, "we have hired you on this business, for the want of a better, you
wretched fellow! and if you give us any more of your nonsense, by ----
I'll send a bullet through your brain! Do you hear me, Tip?"

"Och, aisy, aisy wid ye! I don't murther me! Bad luck to me that I ever
cam wid ye! Och, and if ivver I live to die, won't I see and bury my
ould body out o' the rache of all the docthers in the world? if I don't,
divel burn me!" We all laughed aloud at Tip's truly Hibernian
expostulation.

"Come, sir, mount! over with you!" said we, helping to push him upwards.
"Now, drop this bag on the other side," we continued, giving him the
sack that contained our implements. We all three of us then followed,
and alighted safely in the churchyard. It poured with rain; and, to
enhance the dreariness and horrors of the time and place, flashes of
lightning followed in quick succession, shedding a transient awful glare
over the scene, revealing the white tombstones, the ivy-grown venerable
church, and our own figures, a shivering group, come on an unhallowed
errand! I perfectly well recollect the lively feelings of
apprehension--"the compunctious visitings of remorse"--which the
circumstances called forth in my own breast, and which, I had no doubt,
were shared by my companions.

As no time, however, was to be lost, I left the group, for an instant,
under the wall to search out the grave. The accurate instructions I had
received enabled me to pitch on the spot with little difficulty; and I
returned to my companions, who immediately followed me to the scene of
operations. We had no umbrellas, and our greatcoats were saturated with
wet; but the brandy we had recently taken did us good service, by
exhilarating our spirits and especially those of Tip. He untied the sack
in a twinkling, and shook out the hoes and spades, etc.; and taking one
of the latter himself, he commenced digging with such energy that we had
hardly prepared ourselves for work before he had cleared away nearly the
whole of the mound. The rain soon abated, and the lightning ceased for a
considerable interval, though thunder was heard occasionally grumbling
sullenly in the distance, as if expressing anger at our unholy
doings--at least I felt it so. The pitchy darkness continued, so that we
could scarcely see one another's figures. We worked on in silence, as
fast as our spades could be got into the ground; taking it in turns, two
by two, as the grave would not admit of more. On--on--on we worked till
we had hollowed out about three feet of earth. Tip then hastily joined
together a long iron screw or borer, which he thrust into the ground,
for the purpose of ascertaining the depth at which the coffin yet lay
from us.

To our vexation, we found a distance of three feet remained to be got
through.

"Sure, and by the soul of St. Patrick, but we'll not be done by the
morning" said Tip, as he threw down the instrument and resumed his
spade.

We were all discouraged. Oh, how earnestly I wished myself at home, in
my snug little bed in the Borough! How I cursed the Quixotism that had
led me into such an undertaking! I had no time, however, for reflection,
as it was my turn to relieve one of the diggers; so into the grave I
jumped, and worked away as lustily as before. While I was thus engaged,
a sudden noise, close to our ears, so startled me, that I protest I
thought I should have dropped down dead in the grave I was robbing.

I and my fellow-digger let fall our spades, and all four stood still for
a second or two in an ecstasy of fearful apprehension. We could not see
more than a few inches around us, but heard the grass trodden by
approaching feet! They proved to be those of an ass, that was turned at
night into the churchyard, and had gone on eating his way towards us;
and, while we were standing in mute expectation of what was to come
next, opened on us with an astounding hee-haw! hee-haw! hee-haw! Even
after we had discovered the ludicrous nature of the interruption, we
were too agitated to laugh. The brute was actually close upon us, and
had _given tongue_ from under poor Tip's elbow, having approached him
from behind as he stood leaning on his spade. Tip started suddenly
backward against the animal's head, and fell down.

Away sprang the jackass, as much confounded as Tip, kicking and
scampering like a mad creature among the tombstones, and hee-hawing
incessantly, as if a hundred devils had got into it for the purpose of
discomfiting us. I felt so much fury and fear lest the noise should lead
to our discovery I could have killed the brute if it had been within my
reach, while Tip stammered, in an affrightened whisper--"Och, the baste!
Och, the baste! The big black divel of a baste! The murtherous,
thundering----" and a great many epithets of the same sort. We
gradually recovered from the agitation which this provoking interruption
had occasioned; and Tip, under the promise of two bottles of whisky as
soon as we arrived safe at home with our prize, renewed his exertions,
and dug with such energy that we soon cleared away the remainder of the
superincumbent earth, and stood upon the bare lid of the coffin. The
grapplers, with ropes attached to them, were then fixed in the sides and
extremities, and we were in the act of raising the coffin, when the
sound of a human voice, accompanied with footsteps, fell on our startled
ears. We heard both distinctly, and crouched down close over the brink
of the grave, awaiting in breathless suspense a corroboration of our
fears. After a pause of two or three minutes, however, finding that the
sounds were not renewed, we began to breathe more freely, persuaded that
our ears must have deceived us.

Once more we resumed our work, succeeded in hoisting up the coffin--not
without a slip, however, which nearly precipitated it down again to the
bottom, with all four of us upon it--and depositing it on the graveside.
Before proceeding to use our screws or wrenches, we once more looked and
listened, and listened and looked; but neither seeing nor hearing
anything we set to work, prized off the lid in a twinkling, and a
transient glimpse of moonlight disclosed to us the shrouded inmate--all
white and damp. I removed the face-cloth, and unpinned the cap, while
M---- loosed the sleeves from the wrists. Thus were we engaged, when
E----, who had hold of the feet, ready to lift them out, suddenly
let them go--gasped, "Oh, my God there they are!" and placed his hand on
my arm. He shook like an aspen leaf. I looked towards the quarter
whither his eyes were directed, and, sure enough, saw the figure of a
man--if not two--moving stealthily towards us. "Well, we're discovered,
that's clear," I whispered as calmly as I could.

"We shall be murdered!" groaned E----.

"Lend me one of the pistols you have with you," said M----
resolutely; "by ----, I'll have a shot for my life, however!"

As for poor Tip, who had heard every syllable of this startling
colloquy, and himself seen the approaching figures, he looked at me in
silence, the image of black horror! I could have laughed even then, to
see his staring black eyes--his little cocked ruby-tinted nose--his
chattering teeth.

"Hush--hush!" said I, cocking my pistol, while M---- did the same;
for none but myself knew that they were unloaded. To add to our
consternation, the malignant moon withdrew the small scantling of light
she had been doling out to us, and sank beneath a vast cloud, "black as
Erebus," but not before we had caught a glimpse of two more figures
moving towards us in an opposite direction. "Surrounded!" two of us
muttered in the same breath. We all rose to our feet, and stood
together, not knowing what to do--unable in the darkness to see one
another distinctly. Presently we heard a voice say, in a subdued tone,
"Where are they? Where? _Sure_ I saw them! Oh, there they are.
Halloa--halloa!"

That was enough--the signal of our flight. Without an instant's pause,
or uttering another syllable, off we sprung, like small-shot from a
gun's mouth, all of us in different directions, we knew not whither. I
heard the report of a gun--mercy on me! and pelted away, scarcely
knowing what I was about, dodging among the graves--now coming
full--butt against a plaguy tombstone, then tumbling on the slippery
grass--while some one followed close at my heels, panting and puffing,
but whether friend or foe I knew not.

At length I stumbled against a large tombstone; and, finding it open at
the two ends, crept under it, resolved there to abide the issue. At the
moment of my ensconcing myself the sound of the person's footsteps who
had followed me suddenly ceased. I heard a splashing sound, then a
kicking and scrambling, a faint stifled cry of "Ugh--oh, ugh" and all
was still. Doubtless it must be one of my companions, who had been
wounded. What could I do, however? I did not know in what direction he
lay--the night was pitch-dark--and if I crept from my hiding-place, for
all I knew, I might be shot myself. I shall never forget that hour--no,
never! There was I, squatting like a toad on the wet grass and weeds,
not daring to do more than breathe! Here was a predicament! I could not
conjecture how the affair would terminate.

Was I to lie where I was till daylight, that then I might step into the
arms of my captors? What was become of my companions? While turning
these thoughts in my mind, and wondering that all was so quiet, my ear
caught the sound of the splashing of water, apparently at but a yard or
two's distance, mingled with the sounds of a half-smothered human
voice--"Ugh! ugh! Och, murther! murther! murther!"--another splash--"and
isn't it dead, and drowned, and kilt I am----"

Whew! _Tip_ in trouble, thought I, not daring to speak. Yes--it was poor
Tip, I afterwards found--who had followed at my heels, scampering after
me as fast as fright could drive him, till his career was unexpectedly
ended by his tumbling--souse--head over heels, into a newly-opened grave
in his path, with more than a foot of water in it. There the poor fellow
remained, after recovering from the first shock of his fall, not daring
to utter a word for some time, lest he should be discovered--straddling
over the water with his toes and elbows stuck into the loose soil on
each side, to support him. This was his interesting position, as he
subsequendy informed me, at the time of uttering the sounds which first
attracted my attention. Though not aware of his situation at the time, I
was almost choked with laughter as he went on with his soliloquy,
somewhat in this strain:

"Och, Tip, ye ould divel! Don't it sarve ye right, ye fool? Ye
villainous ould coffin-robber! Won't ye burn for this here-after, ye
sinner? Ulaloo! When ye are dead yourself, may ye be trated like that
poor cratur--and yourself alive to see it! Och, hubbaboo! hubbaboo!
Isn't it sure that I'll be drowned, an' then it's kilt I'll be!" A loud
splash, and a pause for a few moments, as if he were readjusting his
footing--"Och! an' I'm catching my dith of cowld! Fait, an' it's a divel
a drop o' the two bottles o' whisky I'll ever see--Och, och,
och!"--another splash--"och, an' isn't this uncomfortable! Murther and
oons!--if ever I come out of this--sha'n't I be dead before I do?"

"Tip--Tip--Tip!" I whispered in a low tone. There was a dead silence.
"Tip, Tip, where are you? What's the matter, eh?" No answer; but he
muttered in a low tone to himself--"_Where am I?_ by my soul! Isn't it
dead, and kilt, and drowned, and murthered I am --that's all!"

"Tip--Tip--Tip!" I repeated, a little louder.

"Tip, indeed! Fait, ye may call, bad luck to ye--whoever ye are--but
it's divel a word I'll be after spaking to ye."

"Tip, you simpleton! It's I--Mr. ----"

In an instant there was a sound of jumping and splashing, as if surprise
had made him slip from his standing again, and he called out, "Whoo!
whoo! an' is't you, sweet Mr. ----! What is the matter wid ye? Are
ye kilt? Where are they all? Have they taken ye away, every mother's son
of you?" he asked eagerly, in a breath.

"Why, what are _you_ doing, Tip? Where are _you_?"

"Fait, an' it's being _washed_ I am, in the feet, and in the queerest
_tub_ your honour ever saw!" A noise of scuffling not many yards off,
silenced us both in an instant.

Presently I distinguished the voice of E----, calling out, "Help,
M----!" (My name.) "Where are you?" The noise increased, and seemed
nearer than before. I crept from my lurking place, and aided at Tip's
resurrection, when both of us hurried towards the spot whence the sound
came. By the faint moonlight I could just see the outlines of two
figures violently struggling and grappling together. Before I could come
up to them both fell down, locked in each other's arms, rolling over
each other, grasping one another's collars, gasping and panting as if in
mortal struggle. The moon suddenly emerged, and who do you think,
reader, was E----'s antagonist? Why, the person whose appearance had so
discomfited and affrighted us all--OUR COACHMAN.

That worthy individual, alarmed at our protracted stay, had, contrary to
our injunctions, left his coach to come and search after us. He it was
whom we had seen stealing towards us; his step--his voice had alarmed
us, for he could not see us distinctly enough to discover whether we
were his fare or not. He was on the point of whispering my name, it
seems when we must all have understood one another--when lo! we all
started off in the manner which has been described and he himself, not
knowing that he was the reason of it, had taken to his heels, and fled
for his life! He supposed we had fallen into a sort of ambuscade. He
happened to hide himself behind the tombstone next but one to that which
sheltered E----. Finding all quiet, he and E----, as if by
mutual consent, were groping from their hiding-places, when they
unexpectedly fell foul of one another--each too affrighted to speak--and
hence the scuffle.

After this satisfactory dénouement we all repaired to the grave's
mouth, and found the corpse and coffin precisely as we had left them. We
were not many moments in taking out the body, stripping it, and
thrusting it into the sack we had brought. We then tied the top of the
sack, carefully deposited the shroud, etc., in the coffin, re-screwed
down the lid--fearful, impious mockery!--and consigned it once more to
its resting-place, Tip scattering a handful of earth on the lid, and
exclaiming reverently--"An' may the Lord forgive us for what we have
done to ye!" The coachman and I then took the body between us to the
coach, leaving M----, and E----, and Tip to fill up the grave.

Our troubles were not yet ended, however. Truly it seemed as though
Providence were throwing every obstacle in our way. Nothing went right.
On reaching the spot where we had left the coach, behold it lay several
yards farther in the lane, tilted into the ditch--for the horses, being
hungry, and left to themselves, in their anxiety to graze on the verdant
bank of the hedge, had contrived to overturn the vehicle in the
ditch--and one of the horses was kicking vigorously when we came up--the
whole body off the ground--and resting on that of his companion. We had
considerable difficulty in righting the coach, as the horses were
inclined to be obstreperous. We succeeded, however--deposited our unholy
spoil within, turned the horses' heads towards the high road, and then,
after enjoining Jehu to keep his place on the box, I went to see how my
companions were getting on. They had nearly completed their task, and
told me that "shovelling _in_ was surprisingly easier than shovelling
_out_!"

We took great pains to leave everything as neat and as nearly resembling
what we found it as possible, in order that our visit might not be
suspected. We then carried away each our own tools, and hurried as fast
as possible to our coach, for the dim twilight had already stolen a
march upon us, devoutly thankful that, after so many interruptions, we
had succeeded in effecting our object.

It was broad daylight before we reached town, and a wretched coach
company we looked, all wearied and dirty--Tip especially, who
nevertheless snored in the corner as comfortably as if he had been warm
in his bed. I heartily resolved with him, on leaving the coach, that it
should be "the devil's own dear self only that should timpt me out again
_body-snatching_."



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


