
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Tounghoo Women
Author: Ellen B Mason
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0900211.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: March 2009
Date most recently updated: March 2009

This eBook was produced by: S' Aung Phwa Chit

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: Tounghoo Women
Author: Ellen B Mason

New York:
ANSON D. F. RANDOLPH, PUBLISHER, 683 BROADWAY.
1860.

SECOND EDITION.



Ladies, will you Approve or Condemn?




REMARKS.


When the mission was first established in Tounghoo, six years ago, not a
Karen female could read a syllable. Now many hundreds can read, and fifty
young women are fitting themselves for teachers, twelve of whom have
already branch schools upon the mountains.

When the work was begun, the people ridiculed the proposition of
instructing _girls_ in books. Now the chiefs themselves select the girls,
bring them down, feed them, clothe them, supply their books, and find
them places for teaching.

When this work was begun, the chiefs scoffed at the idea of girls
becoming teachers. Now there is the loudest call for them all over the
mountains, robber chiefs even promising their support.

When this work was begun, the Karens had not a foot of land to rest them
on, when they came down from the mountains. Now they have a beautiful
place of thirty acres, with a large handsome institution, and a pretty
settlement, all their own, close to the town.

When this work was begun, I had to support the men while clearing the
ground for the school-house. Now these same chiefs have brought in more
than 3000 rupees for the girls' school, and a young men's school on the
same land.

When the work was begun, I had to measure out our own rice, meal by meal,
to persuade them to remain over Sunday. The same chief have supported
themselves week after week, to enjoy the privilege of coming in at night
to study the word of God.

When this work was begun, the women presented the strongest barrier,
opposing bitterly their girls leaving the paddy field to learn books.

Now these same women work day and night to prepare dresses for them, and
come trooping down from the mountains loaded with thatch for their
cook-house and dormitories.

It is just such a work and just such labors that are needed for the
Burmese and Shan women of Tounghoo.

ELLEN B. MASON.



SIGNATURES.


The undersigned approve of the Ladies of America undertaking the Female
Department of this work for the Burmese and Shan women of Tounghoo, in
connection with the Tounghoo Missionaries.

DR. TYNG writes that he "has read with interest Mrs. Mason's statements,
and begs to enclose a small contribution from his ladies towards its
accomplishment." Dr. Tyng says, he gives the plan his hearty
co-operation, provided there be nothing done that shall interfere with
the denomination now in charge of the field.

DR. BRIGHAM writes: "As an individual, and not in my official character
or station, I most cheerfully commend the above object, after repeated
interviews with Mrs. MASON."

J. C. BRIGHAM, D. D.
J. A. MCNEIL, D. D.
SAMUEL I. PRIME, D. D.

DR. HALLOCK says "he most freely, as an individual and not in any
official capacity, recommends the proposed plan to the ladies of
America."

T. C. DOREMUS, Esq., "cordially recommends it to the approbation of the
ladies and gentlemen."

WM. H. WYCKOFF, L. L. D., and THOMAS ARMITAGE, D. D., "warmly recommend
the object to the ladies, and suggest that they take hold of the work in
any way that they can arrange among themselves."

D. C. HAYES, D. D., writes: "It gives me pleasure to say that I trust
your appeal to Christian ladies in behalf of the women in the large and
needy field of your labors in a heathen land will not be in vain. I am
sure it will do our ladies good to give, and that a good use will be made
of their charities."


Dr. WILLIAMS writes:

"To Mrs. MASON:

"MY DEAR MADAM--The Karen Mission, under the charge of your honored
husband and his fellow-laborers, is probably one of the most blessed in
all the field of modern Missions.

"Your labors to found Schools, and to send Bible-Readers especially among
the women of the Tounghoos of this great field, need not divert any
contributions from the support of Missionary Preachers and Translators,
and are, I think, worthy of all sympathy, and I do most heartily wish
them abundant and continued success.

"Very respectfully,

"WILLIAM R. WILLIAMS,

Pastor of Amity street Baptist Church, N.Y. City."


"In the foregoing views of Dr. Williams I most cheerfully concur.
"BENJAMIN M. HILL.
"August 3d, 1860."

GEORGE GAULT, of Brooklyn, N.Y., says: "I recommend the above object to
the ladies."



HO, AVA! with amber-paved valley and glade,
In sapphires and rubies, and emeralds arrayed;
     Whose picturesque bowers
     Light tremble with showers.
     Of sweet tropic flowers;
Whose minstrel cicadas and bulbouls are singing,
And bright trailing rivers o'er gold sands are ringing,
Where, where is thy virtuous maid?
     Though soft they recline
     Amid perfumes divine,
     And tho' brilliant their eyes
     As their orient skies,
Thy daughters are blighted, corrupted their bloom.
_Like the tints that luxuriate over the tomb._



TOUNGHOO.


TOUNGHOO is the capital of an ancient kingdom, a principality of Ava. It
is about eighty miles in extent, from East to West, and one hundred from
North to South, covering an area of some 8000 square miles. It is about
sixty miles East of Prome, and 100 West of Siam. It lies in the valley of
the Sittang river, a rich level rice country, with a range of mountains
looming up on the East, in some parts said to be seven and eight thousand
feet, and another lower range on the West. Beyond these mountains on the
right flows the Salwen, and on the left the Irriwaddy.

The Burmese of this old Principality, in many respects differ from those
of Martaban or Tenasserion. They are a taller more athletic race, more
haughty and independent. There were a great number of Chiefs or Khans in
Tounghoo, when the English took possession, but only a few submitted to
the foreign government. About sixty, it was said, fled away to the North,
and stockaded about sixty miles north of the city. Here they continued
for a long time, carrying on their guerilla warfare and plundering the
disarmed inhabitants of the land. A few weeks after I entered the city,
their banditti gang came right under the English guns, robbed one man,
shot another in the bazaar, and led off a poor woman at the end of a long
noose. Hearing the noise about midnight, I rushed on to the verandah,
enquiring the cause, when the marauders instantly fired and hurried on.

Signal guns were shot fast and quick. Drums were rolling, torches
glaring, and Sepoys flying in every direction, but not a stray robber
could they find. Those old Chiefs knew too well "the way to the woods."
Every palm tree, every reed, every tumbling brick they knew as well as
their children's faces, while the black Sepoy-strangers, what did they
know? They might stumble over half a dozen Burmans and take them for
heaps of rubbish.

The historical tradition of old Tounghoo is that it was founded by
Mauniep'ga Karens, about six hundred years ago.

It was at one time conquered by the Portuguese, but the Burmese King came
down upon them, took the Portuguese Governor and crucified him in Syriam
near Rangoon. From that time Tounghoo remained a Principality of Ava,
being governed by the Prince Royal until it was taken by the British in
1853.

When it was announced that the "white barbarians" were marching full upon
Tounghoo, the infatuated priests rushed forth with their torches in every
direction, and their magnificent carved monasteries, the work of
centuries, were burned to the ground, leaving only the tall scathed
palm-trunks to mark their broad boundaries.

The nations of Burmah resolve themselves into two distinct classes--those
which have accepted Buddhism, and those which have not. The Buddhist
nations at home in Burmah are the Talaings and the Burmese, distinguished
from the others by possessing a written language and literature, a
religious priesthood, a monarchial government, and that advanced
civilization of the mind, producing a marked distinction between them and
the utterly uncultured tribes. Tounghoo city is inhabited by Burmese and
Talaings. There are also many Shans and Kyens on the lowlands. But the
mountains are held by Karens, of whom there are seven tribes or clans
found in this region.

This province was supposed to be under the special guardianship of four
Chief Nats, who dwelt in little temples in each corner of the kingdom.
Then there were many more assistant Nats who aided in conducting the
affairs of the State, and they had one most curious place of
rendezvous--a grove-temple in the northwest angle of the city. I was
walking one evening near what appeared to be a pretty wood, when I saw a
woman raise something which looked like a thick branch, and disappear. I
instantly attempted to follow, but my arm was respectfully yet firmly
stayed by a native Burman, a stranger.

"Don't go!" he said eagerly, "Don't go, you'll die!"

This, of course, awakened curiosity, and I insisted on entering, stepping
immediately in, knowing the crowd would soon prevent me. Seeing horror
depicted on every face, I stood back quietly, telling them I would not
injure the Nats, and they could'nt me, because Jesus Christ was my
protector, and he was much greater than all the Nats. It was the most
unique little temple I ever saw; about twenty-five feet square, built
entirely of trees, which grew in just that form, with trunks some two
feet in girth, and brim full of branches which were wreathed, laced and
interlaced, twined and intertwined, clear up, forming an almost
impenetrable wall, and a thick, close, beautiful dome above, about thirty
feet high. It must have been the work of fifty years, I should think
certainly, and in the centre was a platform, on which stood six carved
images, three males and three females, one with several arms, holding a
spear and other emblems of power. It was a house dedicated to the goddess
of Child-birth, perhaps the _Fornoues_ of the Celts. The place was held
most sacred, and offerings constantly made there by the women of
Tounghoo, previous to the birth of any child. As I stood and talked to
them there, under Nature's own canopy, a holy fear, an indescribable awe,
seemed to hover over them, and they asked, in all simplicity:

"Who is this Jesus Christ? If we worship him, cannot these Nats harm us?
Will not our children be deformed?"

Assuring them Christ could and would protect them, I urged all who
desired his protection to come to my house the next day. They came to the
number of thirty, and every one gave in their names as determined to
worship Jesus Christ. How sincere they may have been, I cannot say. The
next time I walked around this corner of the city, which was not until
two years, the Nat grove-temple was gone. Not a vestige remained. It was
hewed down without doubt, by these very women who had so long cherished
it as their holiest shrine. This does not look as if the women of
Tounghoo were the most hardened idolaters, and I fully believe, could
they have the light, and be made to _understand_, they would gladly
receive the truth; at least, that many would do so, like the women of
Thyatira.


WOONKADAU.


One day the Woonkadau came, with her suite, to pay respects. This
Tounghoo lady was some sixty years of age--her silvery white hairs combed
smoothly up from an ample forehead, her black eyes keenly glancing
beneath highly arched brows--her fingers gemmed with the nine magic
stones of Burmah--her almost white feet slipped loosely into light
scarlet sandals--her person attired in a beautiful silk robe of modest
pink and white checks, but open in front after the Burman fashion, with a
wide crimson cincture around the bust. Over this a delicate lawn inga, or
jacket, open, with long floating lappets on either side; and above all,
gracefully flowing over the left shoulder, a richly wrought white lace
mantle. Imagine such a figure, and you have before you a Woonkadau of
Tounghoo, or former governor's favorite wife, as she appeared when she
paid me a visit, with her suite, soon after my arrival.

There were seven or eight ladies in her train, all with the hair
exquisitely dressed, straight over the forehead, with a curious half
curl, the smallest in the world, caressing each side, and the large knot
behind encircled with orchids, or fragrant screw-pine. The screw-pine is
really fascinating; indeed, I believe it is the very prettiest head-dress
in Burmah. Screw-pine flowers somewhat resemble corn flowers in the
sheath, and are deliciously fragrant. They are often a cubit in length,
and as large as the largest ear of corn, but small ones are chosen for
the hair. The flower and sheath are both a light straw color; and the
sheath, or a part of it, is neatly separated into threads, so put on as
to fall gracefully back over the knot, with the flower and half sheath
fastened underneath, altogether composing a chaplet really charming for
its elegant simplicity.

Orchids are much sought for by all Burmese ladies, particularly the
delicate bolbophyllum, one species of which is delicately sweet, and of a
light yellow color. There are some curious notices of this flower in
Burmese history. It states that a little less than a hundred years ago
these air plants were _taxed_ by government!

The Myu-woon of Tounghoo sent annually a tax of this flower to Ava as
follows: To the king twelve loads, to the queen two loads, to the heir
apparent four, to the princess one, to the court four, to the treasury
two, to the ministers of state two, and another load for show. Each load
contained five hundred bunches, making in all _fourteen thousand_ racemes
of one simple orchid, to be gathered annually for this voluptuous court!
These were collected by the Karens, and one cannot but think how many
thousands of burning tear-drops must have fallen from anguished mothers
over those lovely blossoms! And not only these were they obliged to
gather, but also two other species--the charming dendrobium and another
air plant--all in the same ratio, amounting to _forty-two thousand_
orchid blossoms to be collected in the most hurrying season of the year!

This company of Burmese ladies were all self-possessed, with that high
bearing of deference which marks the well-bred in every land, and the
grace of their attitude, as they took their different positions upon the
mat, was perfectly engaging.

Having ordered mats neatly covered, I took a low seat beside her,
enquiring:

"Does the Woonkadau wish to hear of Jesus Christ?"

"I have come to hear Payah (your ladyship).

"How old is the Woonkadau?" turning to an attendant.

"I have lived sixty-five years," she replied herself.

"Indeed, the great mother is as old as my grand-mother. I am but a child
in years beside her; nevertheless, God in great mercy has showed me the
true way to happiness."

"Let us hear! let us hear!" exclaimed her attendants; so we endeavored to
tell them, slowly and solemnly, of man's sinful state, need of a Saviour,
the atonement provided, and the peace attendant upon receiving it; and
without our noticing it, they remarked at once to one another, that it
was very different--this salvation by Christ, and the Nicban
(annihilation) promised in the Bedagat, after thousands of years in hell.
The Woonkadau was a very understanding woman; and so were four or five of
her attendants, one of whom could read very well, but the lady herself
had never learned to read.

Having remarked that she would not like us to say that her religion was
wrong; that God was displeased when they worshipped pagodas, idols, or
poongees, she replied:

"You are a woman, the same as myself, only you have more knowledge; and
what you say is not your own words, but God's words. We must receive them
as God's words," (meaning our God's words.)

They all assented to the truth, but it is to be feared it was from
politeness, as they did not seem at all affected by it. Towards noon she
begged leave to retire, as it was her hour for sleep, so having served
them with a cup of tea and a plate of gingernuts, they withdrew. I did
not return the Woonkadau's call, for I found no time, there were so many
with us, but I kept up an acquaintance by sending little messages with
various passages marked for her attendants to read to her. One day,
having sent a cup of guava jelly of our own making, with the "Life of
Christ" in Burmese, she returned many salams, saying she had long desired
to see such a book, and would give particular attention to the paragraphs
marked for her.

In this lady's train was a young Braminee, very pretty, graceful and
lovely in her manners. She looked intelligent, but said little; one of
her companions however remarked:

"You are white, and God loves you; we are dark. He don't love us."

"You say God made us all," observed one of the Woonkadau' maidens, "and
you say He loves all. If this be so why has He made you white and me
brown? No, no," she continued, with a bitter smile, "He don't love the
Burmese. He's the God of the English, not the God of the Burmans."

"You plant a flower-garden," one of the Christians replieds trying to
clear up the matter. "You put in tube-roses, balsams and four-o-clocks?"

"Hoga K'myah," (yes, sir) with a graceful inclination.

"You are fond of your flowers, because you planted them yourself; so you
carefully tend them, water them, dig about them, get rich soil for them;
and watch with admiring interest to see the blossoms open."

"Hoga K'myah."

"By and by, a companion comes in, and begins to carry off all the red and
yellow balsams. 'Stop! stop!' you cry, 'you are spoiling my garden.' 'No,
no,' she says, 'you want only the white flowers. I'll have all the
rest.'"

"She shouldn't have 'em."

"Just so. Now the world is God's garden, and the people flowers, red,
white and yellow."

"And Mahnat, (the devil) wants to get them all, but he tries the hardest
for the red and yellow ones," joined in my interpreter, eagerly. "He
comes up with his imps, and pulls here, there, yonder, and says, 'I'll
have these, I'll have these to keep my fires burning.'"

"But God says, 'No,'" we added; "He says to the Natsoes, 'You shall not
destroy my pretty brown flowers;" and the assistants explained to them
that God had sent his Bible and his teachers, to show them how to keep
out of his hands.

They were pleased with the simile, as Orientals always are with anything
like a parable.

"But your dress is always white, while ours is often faded and dirty,"
said the attendant who could read, and whose dress was not a little
soiled. "Of course God loves you most because your clothes are whitest."
So then we had to try again, and bring them to understand that, though it
were good to have clean clothes, yet it was the heart that God looked at;
and if that was fragrant. He would love them more and more. It was
difficult, however, to make them believe that he would overlook the
outside to notice the inside; and finally they were told if they would
have it so, then they should wash their clothes and keep them clean. But
this only led, where we knew it would, to their pleading poverty,
although probably there were not more than two or three present but
carried twenty or thirty dollars' worth of gems upon her fingers.

Nearly all the Mienkadaus, or gentlemen's wives, in and around the city,
have visited us at different times; and one is a person of uncommon
talents. She can read fluently, and the people say she knows more of
Burman books than any man in the place, except two or three priests. This
is a rare case, as I have not seen more than three other women in
Tounghoo who could read at all. I feel a deep interest in this person,
and much time has been spent in instructing her; perhaps more so, because
she is, for a heathen, really a loveable woman, soft and winning in her
manners, and has a particularly sweet voice. She visits our house
frequently, reads our books, and says she is considering the Christian
system, but does not yet believe. Her husband is from Ava; a tall,
handsome, noble-browed man; but as proud and haughty as the court of his
native city. This lady has a pretty daughter whom she has herself taught
to read; and whom she wishes to place with me for instruction; and I can
but hope that they will sometime become humble disciples.

One day this woman was stumbling on the doctrine of the Trinity. She was
advised to let it alone, until she knew more of Christ's life and
doctrine, but she would dwell on that, and remarked:

"I can understand all but this; but here is a point inexplicable." Having
in vain tried to illustrate the subject, she was asked if she did not
love her husband."

"Certainly."

"Obey him, too?"

"Usually."

"What, without seeing all his heart, or knowing all his thoughts?"

"Ah! I see," she replied, "You mean that we should be content to obey God
without understanding him."

"His own Son died for you--what husband ever did that?"

"True, true."

"Would she feel any happier," she was asked, "if she could even look
clear through the eternal God, as she could her idols of papier mache?"

"No," after a pause. "I--I don't know as I should. He wouldn't seem so
great."

"You think it hard," it was observed one day, "to give up what you call
your merit?"

"Yes, Th'kyen, (madam) I have done a good deal in my life-time for
pagodas and monasteries, and it is hard, very hard."

Oh, my sisters, you should be there on the spot to fully realize these
things. I don't know how you would feel, but I know how I felt, and that
I could not stay the scalding tear-drops as this gifted woman sat before
me bound in the python folds of Buddhism, which had been from childhood
tightening--tightening, and are still drawing, almost irresistibly down
to woe.

Another Mienkadau, an elderly person, is perhaps equally intelligent, but
very different. She has a great intellect, understands almost before the
words are spoken; and will often turn round, and expound to the others,
like any philosopher; taking care, however, to always add the _dac_, or
quotation affix, to let them see she is not herself a believer. This old
dame would converse only with the "Great Teacher" himself, so she was
turned over to the male department. Many attempt to make out that
Christianity and Buddhism are the same; and some of these women appear
really inclined to believe Jesus Christ to be Areemadaya, the anticipated
Buddh. But this woman saw the difference at once.

"They're not alike," she remarked, one day, with emphasis. "Not
alike--they're like this," putting up her hands in opposite directions.

Nothing could be more correct, though not one in fifty will acknowledge
it.

One day several of the Mathoodaus or nuns came to visit us.

They asked for offerings, but I had to tell them, as the Apostle did the
poor lame man, and so gave them Mrs. Ann H. Judson's Catechism, and read
to them the Scriptures, after which we served them with tea, and they
departed apparently highly gratified. One of the number could read; and I
believe she is the only one who can boast of this accomplishment among
the whole fifteen Mathoodaus of Tounghoo. They seemed to receive the
gospel, and it would not be strange if they should hereafter worship
Jesus Christ in connection with Gaudama, and the Nats; and this is
probably what a great many will do. Indeed, were the gospel to be
suddenly withdrawn from the province, undoubtedly a few years hence the
traveler would find, as it was in Rome, in the days of the Emperor
Severus, Jesus Christ's image in the temple with those of the heathen
Gods.

In this way I have sat most of the time from eight o'clock until four for
weeks together, having sometimes forty visitors a day, in ten different
parties. The body would weary, but the spirit never, for it was a rare
and precious privilege.

One day the Sahya-kadau came, with a large company.

The house we occupied being the seat of the City Recorder, a good sized
hall in the centre was the Myusahya-kadau's drawing-room. Here I took
possession on our first Sabbath in Tounghoo, and invited the women to
listen. I had a good interpreter, by whom I could readily communicate
through the Pwo, and they appeared different from any Burman women I ever
met. Generally they are very curious about our clothes, food, color, &c.,
but the assembly on this Sabbath day seemed only anxious to hear of our
religion, and I never in America saw deeper interest depicted on human
countenances that these women exhibited during this interview.

I encouraged the company each to speak about herself, and, "Ah me," said
one, "I am the mother of five children, and am now childless."

"I am the mother of nine," said another, "and of all, but one remains to
me," and so it went round from one to another, each telling her own
heart-burdens, many of them with tearful eyes.

"But Jesus, when on earth, loved poor sorrowing woman, and--"

"Did He?" questioned the Kadau.

"Yes; and what do you think He said to them?"

"We don't know--we never heard of Him before."

Here I tried to tell them of those "mansions" which Jesus said he was
going to prepare; adding that their little children were undoubtedly up
in those beautiful rooms waiting for them.

"Our children up in beautiful rooms? Do you think they are?"

"Yes."

"With whom?--what's the name?" and here they tried to pronounce the new
name of Christ, but made it sound so oddly they all burst out laughing.

"Yes, yes," trying to reassure them, "that's right, _Yashoo-Kraik_; and
He has promised something to all who become His followers."

"What? What is't?"

"He says He'll wipe away all their tears."

"Does He? Can He if we cry very much?" smiling.

"Yes, and that's not all."

"What more? Do tell, for we never heard of such a man before--What's the
name?"

"_Yashoo-Kraik._"

"_Ya, ya: Yashoo-Kraik, Yashoo-Kraik;_" and all repeated the name, trying
to learn it.

"Yashoo-Kraik says he will give you something better than rings or
dresses, better than children or husbands;" explaining to them their own
sinful state, and need of a Saviour.

"_Ya, ya_, we are all sinners--great sinners; we get angry, we fret, we
repine, we talk bad, and we do bad."

"Yes, at such times _Nat-so_ (the evil spirit,) comes to the verandah of
your hearts, and says, 'May I come in?' '_Hoga,_' you say, and in he
comes, and begins to blow and blow, until he has filled your hearts with
anger and wretchedness."

"True! True!" all responded with interest, but _Nat-so_ is _tai-sothe_
(very bad,) and _will_ come in."

"Hear this," spoke up a young Karen disciple, near us, who had been for
some minutes turning his Karen Testament.

"What is it, Moung?" questioned the Sahya-kadau.

"Hear this;" and he read to them the 4th of Luke, how the devils, at
Christ's command, came out of many, crying out that He was the Son of
God; adding that Christ had conquered all Nats more than a thousand years
ago, and exhorted them to believe in Him.

"We do believe," exclaimed several voices at once, "and hereafter we'll
worship Jesus Christ."

"Do you say true? Will you surely worship God's Son?"

"_Hoga_--Yes."

And so we dismissed them, they saying, "We'll come and hear more
to-morrow."

The next morning they did come again, filling our room full, and more
than full. So I began by inquiring if they remembered what had been said
to them the day before. Some few tried to tell, but the most they could
say was, that we must worship one Jesus Christ.

"But who is Jesus Christ?" inquired a very sensible-looking woman, who was
not in the day before. "Where can I find him? Is he in Maulmain or in
Bengala? Where did he die? Will he ever come again?" she continued
eagerly, and when satisfied on these points, "Why," she exclaimed, "have
I never heard this before? I believe in this Jesus Christ. My heart seems
to light up a little."

"And mine, too," joined in the lady of one of the chiefs. "How is this?"
she continued. "You see me an old woman. I began to look for Areemadaya
when so high," pointing to a child some seven or eight years old. "I have
been looking ever since, and haven't found him yet. It's of no use to
look any longer. I'll worship Jesus Christ."

This woman's case was particularly interesting. She was so eager to learn
of Christ, it was not enough for her to sit in the circle, but she bent
forward as far as possible in the crowd, as if she would devour every
word; and when the company retired, still there she sat, as party after
party came and went, until nearly night. Several times her children came
and called her, but she would reply:

"Let me alone. I must hear. I am old. What is this world to me?"

At last she vanished away unseen, and I never heard of her again. But she
reminded me strongly of a convert in Dong-yahn. A woman who had been all
her lifetime a Buddhist, until her conversion to Christianity, and after
that she had once fallen into idolatry. But she had also truly repented.
One day I had been telling the sisters something about the Saviour and
heaven, which this old lady did not perfectly understand, so she left her
seat and sat down beside me. "What is it teachress?" she enquired, "Tell
it again please." I repeated it.

"Again mamma, I don't quite understand," putting her hand to her
forehead, as if trying to concentrate her thoughts. Slowly I again
explained in the simplest manner possible; and now light seemed to burst
in upon her understanding, "Oh, I see it! I see it!" she cried, her eyes
and hands uplifted towards heaven, while the tears coursed down her
cheeks: "I see it! I see it!" and there she sat gazing upward, until her
whole face shone with an unearthly radiance. What she saw I know not, but
the angels no doubt whispered her precious things.

Oh, I do believe if the ladies of Christian lands could see these poor
heathen women groping for light as I have done, it would arouse the
coldest blood in Christendom, and send it rolling with the swiftness of
enthusiasm through all their veins.


BURMAN MOTHERS.


At present, Burman mothers (I mean the great mass of them--of course
there are isolated exceptions,) have but one thought, and that is to
bring up their daughters in such a manner as to attract to them the
attention of strangers, so that they may sell them for a good price. Oh,
I have seen, till my eyes ached with weeping, how sin and misery are
brought into Burmese dwellings by Christian Europe. I have seen the bosom
heave, and the tears gush over her offsping, when the poor young mother,
tormented by a consciousness of sin, and the fear of punishment, has
exclaimed:

"What could I do? I was helpless. My mother sold me. A Christian bought
me. Will not the God of the Christian pity me?"

I have seen them dragged away as they sunk fainting at the feet of their
masters, when they found their place was already filled by a European
lady; and I have also seen these helpless creatures, when they have been
hunted by their cruel mothers, and the more cruel purchaser, prepare for
themselves the grave of the suicide. If so-called Christian _men_ can be
so base, so cruel and wicked, as to seek their destruction, ought not
Christian _women_ to put forth still stronger efforts for their
salvation?

The question now is, what can be done for these poor girls? From the days
of Ann H. Judson, our missionaries have labored to rescue them, and not
without success, but the flood of corruption, like a wide sea, has flowed
on from city to city, and the condition of these young women seems
hopeless, unless something can be done to remove them entirely from their
mothers. Missionaries have endeavored, again and again, to bring them
under Christian influence, but their mothers watch them with the utmost
vigilance, to prevent their accursed trade from falling to the ground.

Not knowing what to do, I think we shall commit no sin if we try
something new. I have therefore made an effort to establish a Normal
Training School for Burmese, Talaing and Shan girls, as nearly on the
plan of the Karen Female Institute as practicable, but with an ornamental
department, none however being admitted into the higher branches until
they can read the Scriptures well in their own language. If we can
persuade the mothers to see any nobler prospects for their daughters, so
that they shall be willing to entrust them to a foreign teacher, for two
or three years, we shall have great hope that, with God's blessing, a
change may be effected in their manners and hearts, and through them, in
their companions.

I know one young Burmese who was for several years the pupil of Mrs.
Haswell, of the Maulmain mission, who acquired such high principles that
her influence is seen very decidedly over her associates. She is now in
Tounghoo, ready to aid in a female school, and with her help I did once
open this school, but found it would require the exclusive energies of
one person.

I have already purchased a handsome house and compound, with brick
cook-house and nice bricked roads, with cocoanuts, jacks, and other fruit
trees. It is in a most eligible situation near the Burmese town, on the
river, and so near the Main Guard and Court House, as to be always under
protection. The compound joins Mr. Mason's place, and contains about four
acres of land, for which Government has ordered the title deeds.

I have paid for this establishment 2,000 rupees, and it is all ready for
the school. I now want for this undertaking the following articles:

1st. Permanent support, or $450 the year for a teacher, and native
assistant.

2d. The cost of the teacher's passage and outfit.

3d. A box of slates, knives, scissors, pencils and paper.

4th. Apparatus, such as Scripture cards, a pair of large globes, a set of
outline maps, a magic lantern, a stereoscope, with views illustrative of
the earth or its inhabitants, or anything illustrating the natural
sciences; a large microscope would be invaluable, mathematical
instruments, drawing and painting materials, worsted work and materials,
a few English books of reference on all subjects connected with the Bible
or science. Second-hand will answer every purpose.

All these things, except the microscope, with a piano also, have been
provided for the Karen Female Institute by friends in England. The
teacher's support and passage back overland have also been granted by
ladies in England, but the Burmese and Shan Training School is entirely
disconnected from the Karen Institute, and everything will have to be
kept wholly separate.


KAREN FEMALE INSTITUTE.


During the last four years, _God, the Mighty God of Jacob, who still
doeth wonders among the heathen_, has brought into existence the Female
Institute, for the seven Karen clans of Tounghoo. He has also granted the
house and land for a Burmese and Shan school. The Institute is now, I
trust, firmly established; and the large teak-wood building which the
Karens have been aiding me to erect for them, is ere this, I hope,
completed.

In order that this undertaking might in no way affect the treasury of the
A. B. M. Union; and in order that I might give all the property over to
the Karens, and thereby make it _self-supporting_,--I engaged not to
receive any aid for seven years from March, 1857, from any Baptist in the
United States, either for myself or for the Karen Institute, supposing it
would take seven years to get it firmly established. That work is
already, through God's great mercy, accomplished, so that there is no
longer this reason for declining it, but there is my pledge. An expedient
has however occurred to me, and I have acted accordingly. I now take my
support from the Union, and shall seek the same amount annually, and pay
it into the treasury of the Union. I do this because some make this an
excuse for not helping to evangelize the women of Burmah, and I would
gladly remove all stumbling blocks.

Concerning the Burmese Training or Normal School I never made any pledge,
that I am aware of, nor concerning any other except the one mentioned. I
have asked the Secretary of our Union if I might accept voluntary
assistance for this school, or another Karen school, on the same plan,
and I understood him to express perfect willingness. I should not wish,
however, to receive anything which would deduct from the annual
contributions to the mission.

I have come home for teachers for these two schools, and, if it please
God, my own daughter will return with me and take charge of the
Institute, her outfit and passage being all provided in England.

I have come home overland for _teachers_ and _Bible Readers_--not to see
the world--any more than I remained in New York to see that little part
of it four years ago. I did stop in New York "four weeks, on expense,"
but solely in behalf of dear children, whose father was too sick to help
them, and whose mother was in heaven--and the whole expense was borne by
myself alone.

So now I came home the quickest way possible; because I left my dear
husband without a child with him; because I couldn't work on longer alone
efficiently; and because there are several very important matters
concerning Burmese persecution of the Karens, with which I chance to be
particularly acquainted, and these are to be settled by the Commissioner
of Pegu in December or January next, Knowing that there would be some to
complain, I asked no Society to help me, but advanced my own widow's
mite, almost every dollar I had for my little boy's education, to pay our
expenses home, and support myself and children while in this country. If
it please God, in whom alone I trust, to return this for him I shall be
very thankful. If not I and my boy will bear it. I thank God that he has
his own sainted father's heart, and is ready for sacrifice.


FEMALE BIBLE READERS.


But there is another work separate from these schools, in which I do
earnestly wish the ladies of this Christian land would take an interest,
for it does seem to me of the deepest importance. It is that of _sending
female Bible Readers to the heathen women of Tounghoo_--or by some means
instructing them in a knowledge of the Sacred Scriptures.

I find many on this side of the world who think Burmah is already
evangelized. A sad mistake! It is estimated that there are in Burmah,
under English rule, some _three millions of females_. Among these, about
35,000 Karen females have, we trust, renounced their heathen rites, and
received teachers; but among the Burmese and Talaings it is believed
there are not more than _one thousand_, at most, at all under Christian
instruction.

Bible Societies send Bibles, Tract Societies send tracts, and Mission
Societies send missionaries, _but all for the men_. Christians have
apparently thought to convert the men first and the women afterwards, as
the Indian said his people did:

"When we Indian begin white man's custom, we begin like greenhorn
woodman," said an eloquent Cherokee: "We hitch the chain to the top end of
the log. We build big school-house, and put in all boys. By and by our
young chiefs come out like white men. Then they say 'Where our wives?
Ignorant squaw not love books. She love big moose. We not learn books.'

"Then chiefs say: 'We no pull this way. We hitch to the lower end. Then
we build bigger house, we put in all girls.'

"'Ah!' say the young hunters, 'Now we study. Brave not know books, squaw
not know brave.' Then up come old hickory."

So Government supports two boys' schools in Burmah and none for girls,
and yet were all the young men of the land to receive each a thorough
secular education, and should Government continue its boys' schools for
fifty years, at a cost of lacs of rupees, still if nothing is done for
girls, they must marry uneducated, heathen wives, who will be sure to
instruct their children in all the national prejudices and superstitions,
and so error will be perpetuated.


WOMEN IN BURMAH.


No land probably east of the Levant presents so great encouragement to
efforts in behalf of female elevation as this, because here woman is not
secluded as in other Asiatic lands, but is left free to follow her own
will. But alas for freedom when the mind and heart are left uncultured.
Instead of that grateful reverence which woman owes to man for lifting
from her the crushing burden of seclusion, and which the refined and
educated delight to give, Burmese women are haughty, bold, and supremely
selfish.

All know woman in Burmah, her unbounded influence, yet deplorable
degradation, her strength of character, yet almost utter ignorance of
letters, her persuasive grace and courtesy, yet most corrupted morals and
ungoverned passions. No goddess of mercy to kiss away the tear from the
eye of the unfortunate is woman in Burmah, but the chief supporter of all
lying, all deception, all revelling, all idolatry.

But educate the women of this land. Create in their minds a thirst for
knowledge, a love for an enlightened Government, and who will say you do
not command the pulse of the nation?

Do I over-estimate the influence of woman in pagan lands? Let the
experienced rulers of those lands and other men of thought and
observation decide.

"It is the ignorance and superstitious zeal of the women and their
powerful influence upon their families, that in reality constitutes the
stronghold of Hindoo idolatry."--_Rev. J. Ulman_.

At the regatta, the buffalo fight, and the gaming table, woman is the
principal wrangler, leaving her own household to suffer, and to bear the
weight of her angry passions, if she loses her bet. She is the _business_
person of the land, carrying on nearly all the trade of the country. She,
too, is the _educator_ of Burmah. It is _woman_ who instructs the young
all about nats, ghosts, witches, and all manner of superstition. It is
_woman_ who tramples on the white book, and gives her son the palm leaf.
It is _woman_ who cannot let the earth revolve. It is _woman_ who teaches
the tottling child to tug up its dress full of sand every night for the
pagoda. It is _woman_ who climbs long weary steps to lay her offering
before the god, and it is _woman_, whether in the metropolis or jungle
_chevaux de frise_, who excites discord, fans the flame of rebellion, and
overturns dynasties. There, is therefore, more hope in laboring for the
women of Burmah than for those of other pagan lands, for she can and
_must_ rise; and from being the votary of self, the fosterer of crime,
she may become, with God's blessing, the renovator of Burmah, arching
every threshold with the roses of virtue, peace, and love, and inspiring
her sons with the holiest purposes.

If the women are educated, Burmah is educated. If they are Christianized,
Burmah is Christianized.

The reason Burmah is not converted is because the women are not, and the
reason the women are not converted is because they _do not understand_.

It is not because they are so bigoted that they will not listen. Mrs.
Ingalls and Mrs. Knapp will not tell you so. But it is because they
_don't understand_, or at least this is a great hindrance.

I had once been talking all day to the Burmese women of Tounghoo, as they
crowded our verandah, troop after troop, until I could scarcely speak a
loud word, when I called Mr. Mason's assistant and asked him to talk to
them. He did so, with great eloquence and earnestness, but they only sat
and _stared_.

Feeling distressed at their idle gaze, I inquired "Why do you not
understand?"

"Oh, _we can't_ understand," the most intelligent one replied; "Moung
Shwa Moung is like Mount Meru. He knows everything, _but he can't talk
woman talk_."

And this is just the trouble. The native preachers have not the patience
to sit down and say one simple truth over and over. If you would have
Burmah redeemed unto the Lord, _send women to women_, and let them teach
them the _A B C_ of Christianity.

There ought to be immediately fifty women appointed to this work. Five
native readers, with one foreigner, might take each a district, and work
thoroughly from door to door, from house to house, from hamlet to hamlet,
for five years, then, _possibly_, Burmah might be getting ready for the
millennium.


WOMAN TALK.


One year I visited about 150 Burmese women at their own houses, such as
would not go to the missionary. On one of these excursions, I went to a
door where three fruit women were conversing: "_Thwa! thwa!_ Go! go!" was
the immediate reception, waving us away with the hand. The heat was
intense, and we felt ready to sink, but at that moment the awful judgment
rose so vividly before me, I could not move, but stood there saying, in
conciliatory tones, that we had come all the way from home on foot to
tell them of a Friend who loved them.

"Jesus Christ?" they inquired with infinite scorn. "We want nothing of
your Jesus Christ."

We went on, however, telling them of the soul, of their danger, and of
the atonement, and finally the hard features of the orange woman began to
relax:

"Don't know, don't know," she muttered in a low voice; "our father,
grand-father, grand-mother all go this way," and she drew back a little
from the door.

"Come in," she said, but her companions were in no haste, so my
interpreter continued, for I could not speak Burmese:

"Ah, we are all sinners," she replied, "but there's no use troubling
ourselves now."

"Sit down," said the citron woman, "It's very hot," and gladly we
accepted the tardy hospitality. But one kept her hold upon the door,
saying she would worship Gaudama as long as she lived.

"Hush! hush!" murmured the citron woman, "we know nothing. All is dark.
We are children lost in the jungle."


BURMAH THINKING.


Two weeks after this, as we passed down the street, the orange woman
hailed us to know if we had brought "The Book," a tract which, had been
read to them on the first visit. The woman seemed to cling to this tract;
but the third time she appeared indifferent. Feeling very sad, I rose,
inquiring if she desired Christians to visit her no more. "No,
teacheress," she exclaimed with emphasis, "_I am thinking_."

O how often have those words brought comfort! When the cold "Go" has met
me; when the loud laugh of derision has rung after me; when traversing
mountains and burning sands; when making our way through stifling crowds
until our feet were blistered, and we have sunk speechless at our door;
_then_ has echoed around us: "Burmah IS THINKING!"

And when in Christian lands we have met the nerveless hand, the cold eye,
the heartless tone, _then_ have fallen so soothingly the words:

"BURMAH _is thinking._"


AN AGED BUDDHIST.


It was one morning while visiting these women that I met an aged heathen,
a person of uncommon mind, who had been and still was a most devout
Buddhist:

"Don't tell me. I can't learn your prayer. I'm too old. Your Jesus don't
know me. I've worshipped Gaudama. I've done good. I've fed the priests.
I've built a kyoung. If I take another now I shall fall between the two.
No, no. Let me alone. I am an old woman. If I am lost, I am lost."

"Hush! hush!" she cried, as we continued pleading: "Tell me not," she
exclaimed in a loud voice: "Tell me not. Had I heard when young I might
have believed, but Loonbie! Loonbie!--_too late, too late_."

The scene was intensely thrilling; and suggested the following lines,
which are addressed to those who, by neglecting to engage in mission
work, are sending before them up to the judgment, that mournful
burthen--"_Loonbie! Loonbie!_"


COME AND WEEP.

Come ye and weep where the Tempter broods,
With his idol groups in their dim solitudes;
Hovering low round pagod fanes,
O'er victim crowds in stains and chains:
Ah, gaze ye down as the old, the gay,
Convulsive press to their Buddh to pray.

Pause with us here while grisly death
Slowly draws the quivering breath--
Point ye to life, to the realms above?
Tell ye of Christ, of pitying love?
Too late! too late! one stifling cry
Rings of the heathen's agony.

Bend o'er her now as the clay-links start,
Quick breathe the prayer of thy bursting heart,
For she goes, though her grasp to th' earth is clinging,
While the funeral knell in her ear is ringing;
While thickening mists are her senses steeping.
And blue grave hues o'er her fingers creeping.

Mark now th' eye so fixed and appalling,
The laboring pulse heaving and falling.
The trembling drops all coldly shrouding--
The shuddering look, the spectres crowding--
She's crossing alone death's deep, dark river,
_Parting from hope for ever and ever!_

One struggle more, the last life-token--
A hollow moan, a sigh half broken--
But see! she springs! her black lips quiver!
"My gods!" a shriek--a gasp--a shiver--
Hold, Death! Hold! One moment free!
O Mercy! sunk in ETERNITY!


FEMALE LABORERS.


Speaking of the lost state of the millions of Burmah, one day, a lady
turned quickly and asked:

"Why! didn't Mrs. Judson, and the _three_ Mrs. Judson do a great deal for
the Burman women?"

All such I would answer by questions: Did not the Apostle Paul do a great
deal for Greece; yet was Greece converted?

Did not Phebe leave her country, go all the way to Rome and labor for
Italy? Did not Priscilla, and Mary and Urbane, and Tryphena and Tryphosa,
and Julia, and Nereus' sister, all labor for the Roman women? and did not
the "beloved Persis labor _much_ in the Lord" for the same people, yet in
their day were the women of that single city converted?

The three Mrs. Judson, and Mrs. Wade, Mrs. Kincaid, Mrs. Bennett, Mrs.
Coleman, Mrs. H. M. Mason, Mrs. Hancock, Mrs. Abbott, Mrs. Howard, Mrs.
Osgood, Mrs. Stilson, Mrs. Haswell, Mrs. Stevens, the two Mrs. Ingalls,
Mrs. Allen, Mrs. Knapp, and Mrs. Crawley and Mrs. Douglass, have all
followed the beloved Persis, and done great things for Burmah, yet the
human heart is the same now as it was in A.D. 60.

People in Christian lands often forget the inexpressible difference
between being born and bred up Christians and being born and educated as
heathen. The amount of labor too, required to enlighten a heathen mind,
is often entirely misapprehended, and so it is thought: "Why,
missionaries have been in Burmah these forty years, and those Burman
women whom you talk about have the Bible in their own language, and might
believe if they would."

True, they have it in their own language, but I think I should be right
in saying that not one Burman woman in a hundred can read it at all. How
then should they believe? And the few who can read how are they to
understand with no one to read over the Scriptures with them, or clear
away one of their difficulties?


WICKED SAULU.


There was the wife of a Burman school-master in my Bible class one day,
an interesting woman, and we were on the history of the apostle Paul. The
woman desired her husband to explain. He did so, and told the story of
Paul's conversion thus:

"Saulu was a bad man--a very bad man, a very bad man, who shut up the
_Dabedaus_ (disciples,) in prison; and one day when he was going to town
to take some of 'em, Jesus Christ met him and struck him right in the
face, which made him blind for three days! Served him right, too!"

"Oh no," interrupted the assistant, "Jesus Christ didn't strike him."

"Then may be 'twas Mahnat (the devil,)" suggested the wife; and there it
would have ended had there been no teacher present, for he was perfectly
sincere in his relation; and, of course, without instruction, the heathen
will attribute the same low revengeful feelings to our Saviour that they
have themselves.

Tounghoo is about as large a province as the State of Massachusetts, and
ought to have a whole company of teachers; but it is one of the most
difficult things to find assistants in the Burmese department. Only a
very few Burmese converts can be induced to leave their homes and go
forth as missionaries. I see no way but for laborers here to go forth and
raise up assistants for themselves; but I should hope that as many as
_four_ native assistant women might be found to commence with, for
Tounghoo, if there can be any head foreign readers to superintend and go
with them.

I long to have something tried for these almost forgotten women, and see
if God will not accept it. Surely Christ did for some of the 25,000
heathen women of Tounghoo and the millions beyond, and I long to go
myself for two or three years among them, although I go as the weakest of
his laborers. It is to me a most solemn and painful thought that has
caused me hours of weeping, that I am such a blunderer in my Master's
vineyard--such a slow learner, and I never enter my school-room or an
assembly of the chiefs in Tounghoo without trembling lest I should kill
as many plants as I should save for him; yet a dear loving voice seems to
whisper: "Fear not, _I_ am with thee."

There should be two foreign ladies at least in this department one, for
the Burmese and one for the _Shans_.


THE SHANS.


The Shans seem to me to be a more interesting race than the Burmese. They
are the merchant princes of Burmah, and come down in great numbers from
Monay, Labong and Zimmay, to all the sea-ports of Burmah. Every year they
come pouring down the mountains all over the land, bringing precious
stones, chinese cloths, their own nice lackered boxes, silver-hafted
knives, sugar, stricklac, and they supply a great part of Burmah with
their spades and dahs. Cows, too, in great numbers, and their ponies are
sought for all over Burmah.

Now I do not imagine that these traders would very readily receive
Christianity because they mingle so much with the Burmese, and their
minds are so full of schemes for getting rich. But the great mass of
quiet agriculturalists and herdsmen, if they could be reached in their
own homes, might be more willing to listen and believe, and possibly the
women might be still more so.

If a Christian lady who could speak their language was to go among the
Shan women, I have no doubt but some would embrace the truth. They are a
neglected people. No missionary ever dwelt among them. Probably Dr.
Brown, of New York, knows as much or more of this people than any other
person, but I am not aware that any missionary is able, or ever has been,
to converse with them in their own language.

A year ago we sent out, for six months, one of our best Karen preachers,
who spoke Burmese, supported by Mrs. Milne, now of Scotland, to those
hundreds who pitched their caravansaries in Tounghoo, and they have ever
since inquired for their friend the _Sahya_. Some of their women have
visited me, and seemed to listen with interest, but the women understand
but little Burmese.

It may not be generally known, but I believe it is true that in the
wonderful work of God among the Karen tribes, _the women have generally
been first to come forward, first to receive the teacher, first to
renounce their superstitions, and first to profess Christ_.

These Shans come down to Tounghoo in great numbers. They have a
flourishing village there, and their friends plant their caravans there
for several months every year.

I once met a large company of them with their wives, on the plains of
Tounghoo. They had just come down from their own country. I thought the
women exceedingly beautiful, far more so than the Burmese, and their
dress was more like Karen.

They all wore black turbans, and seemed gratified with the little
attentions I gave them.

They are a broken nation, like the Karens, no longer having a King of
their own, but paying a tribute to foreigners, and they seem to feel
their degradation deeply.

In the cities, they are Buddhists, having kyoungs, priests, and books of
their own, but Buddhism is not their native religion, and the Karens say
that in the mountains they do not worship Gaudama, but make sacrifices
much like themselves.

They have several independent States adjoining the Red Karen territory,
or near it, on the East, and God has already planted his light house
right upon their borders on the Red Karen hills.


NEWS FROM RED KARENS.


Mr. Mason has just written me: "I have lately heard one item of much
interest to me, from the Red Karen country, and that is, the Eastern Red
Karens, who are under Burmese influence, are very anxious to have
_Bau-a_, (Mrs. Milne's Bghai Karen Missionary from Tounghoo) go and teach
school among them. He has now a large school in a village as far beyond
Kaypo-gyee, the western saubwa, as Tee-tu-poo is from town, (two days
travel.)"

This old Kaypo-gyee is an independent Prince, having one of the most
charming countries, full of teak trees, on the lofty table land of the
Salwen. All the Red Karens are estimated at about 200,000; and they have
traditions of _Se-a-pay_, whom they say created the world and to whom
they make sacrifices. Mr. Mason thinks this name is _Jehovah_. They came
down from China or Tartary, they say, forty generations ago, and they are
quite Shan-like, having mingled so much with them.

The Saubwa Kaypo-gyee, with his son, the heir apparent, have called for
female teachers. He writes me that if I will send him two girls from the
Female Institute at Tounghoo, he will give them every protection, and
cause his young women to learn books. Mr. Mason has once visited this
land, and is waiting for me to accompany him on another visit when it
would not be very difficult to penetrate to the Shan women beyond.


A NEW DOOR OPEN.


I scarcely know which is needed most, the school teachers mentioned for
these women or the Bible Readers. Both are needed at the same time, and
they would help each other inexpressibly. The Readers would, if discreet,
loving and patient, wind their way among the mothers, while the school
would enlist the sympathies of the young women, and their male relatives.

Mr. Mason had often spoken on the subject of Bible Readers in Tounghoo,
and the desirableness of starting out a company of native females into
the work, to go from house to house, from hamlet to hamlet, to reach and
explain the Scriptures directly to the women. But as I was compelled to
leave unexpectedly, no plan was matured.

I had determined, however, that if God prospered the undertaking, to get
out teachers for the two schools; I would then, Providence permitting,
enter into the work of Bible reading among the Burmese and Shan women.

On reaching London, I met dear Mrs. Ranyard,--the L. N. R., of "The
Missing Link," "The Book and its Story," &c., and conversation with her
strengthened me to make an application to the ladies at once.

It is most wonderful how much good God has enabled this self-sacrificing
laborer and her friends to accomplish.

One hundred ladies have joined her as Managers or Superintendents. These
ladies each select from among the uneducated class the best women they
can find, and send them out to read the Bible and sell them to their own
class. They have now two hundred such Bible Women in England, Ireland,
Scotland and France, and they are meeting with unheard of success. God is
crowning the work with his own blessing, stamping upon it his unreserved
approbation. And why? Because they all go praying, _leaning_ upon the
strength of God.

But were those one hundred lady Superintendents to leave the field where
would it be? They are the Engineers of this work--down below, out of
sight--but tending the fires, watching the pressure, and keeping all in
motion.

They have found that lower strata, on which they are working, as our
Saviour found it, and have gone to work as he did, administering both to
the mind and body. Mrs. Ranyard told me they made soups for the poor in
the winter, and sold it to them very low, and in such a way that the
poorest could have his bowlful for some trifling service, and while one
is serving the soup others serve them with portions of God's Word. Then
these lady Superintendents have tea-meetings without number, and sewing
meetings, and clothing-meeting. Besides the ladies must first instruct
their readers every week or day in the Scriptures, in teaching, in
meekness, in manner, in helping the sick, and sympathizing with all
suffering; and above all teach them to lean only on God--but to lean
without doubting. They must also pay these Bible Women, who give up their
time to this work, and keep an account with each one.

Now it is just such an organization that is needed for the heathen women
of Tounghoo. A part of this corps of Superintendents should be here and a
part there, in the field, and those who go forth should also be able to
prescribe for the sick, I don't see why one hundred ladies of this
country should not combine their sympathies and energies together in the
same work, sending two of the number to get out and direct native female
readers in Tounghoo, while the others work in the different cities here
at home. Those here could conduct a little monthly, and we'd talk across
the waters, and cheer up each other.

These lady readers or superintendents in England, publish a monthly of
their own, conducted by dear Mrs. Ranyard, so that they can all
communicate with one another, and God sends them funds to the amount of
35,000 dollars the year.

Note.--There are two hundred women, drawn from the poor, who, among the
worst and most miserable, read the Scriptures, sell copies of the Bible,
(not giving, as that tends to pauperize and degrade,) at the rate of one
penny per week or more, pray with the women whom they visit--who,
expecting them at any time, have got into habits of cleanliness, both as
to house and person, quite unknown before. Each of these women is paid a
stated sum weekly, has a district of her own, and is under the eye of,
and responsible to a lady superintendent. Of this lady class of workers
there are now one hundred engaged. They are truly of that "upper working
class" to which Lord Shaftesbury says he belongs. These new workers have
been raised up in a wonderful way, are doing a wonderful work, and are
effecting wonderful results, social, moral and spiritual, such as will
yet astonish the world.--_Scottish Guardian_.


THE GREAT MISSIONARY ENTERPRISE.


There is one strong argument in favor of this undertaking. It would not,
or ought not to come into collision with any existing societies, or with
any missionaries. I ask to have the experiment tried only in
Tounghoo, where I know the missionaries would hail it with delight. Some
of the great missionary bodies do not wish to send out any single ladies,
do not desire the services of ladies, and do not recognize them, either
as missionaries, assistant missionaries, teachers, or readers.

It was only a day or two ago that I met a lone widow from the interior of
India. She had the language well, was in perfect health, and would gladly
lay down her life for the heathen, yet she is called home, simply because
she is a widow.

I do not think it true what is asserted in Europe that females have not
so much freedom in the States as in England, or that those of my own
denomination have less than those of other churches. In no part of the
world have I seen gentlemen more courteous or considerate towards ladies
than in my native land. It is true the ladies of America do not think and
act for themselves as our sisters do over the Atlantic, nor as freely as
we did a few years ago. In this great missionary enterprise, women seem
to have thrown all the toil and care on to the men, taking themselves
much the same place that they do among the Karens.

I was in the mountains one Sabbath day, and noticed that none but men
came up into the chapel. I inquired of the chiefs where the women were.

"They're here," he answered, pointing over to another narrow floor, about
two feet below the one on which the men were seated. And sure enough
there they were huddled together with their little ones, and the young
women, like a timid flock of sheep in a corner. I immediately stepped out
saying:

"I am a woman. These are my sisters. If they sit down there I shall sit
there with them. Upon this the chiefs in great astonishment, called them
all up to sit down by them. But they refused, declaring it was their
custom, and they didn't wish to change places, because _they must put on
better dresses if they went up there, and of course would have to work
harder!_"


WHAT CAN WOMAN DO?


It is as plain as daylight that God has given to man the sceptre of
_authority_ and to woman the wand of _love_ and _humility_. Who would
exchange them? Certainly not we in heathen lands. Let the brethren take
the authority, and use it too. We couldn't revere them a bit if they
didn't. But they do not ask us to sit down on the door sill. They are
ashamed of us if we do it. If we ask it meekly, will they not give us an
humble place beside them, where we can work for our heathen sisters--we
care not how unseen--but as _accountable_ and _individual_ beings. Could
sons of the Pilgrim mothers refuse us?

My husband says woman's mind is more fruitful in suggestion than that of
man, but it wants man's head to carry out. I think he's right, and more,
it is woman's greatest happiness to feel that man is her director and
guide. But to make her really happy or useful in this world, she must
feel that she is in some way _necessary_ to the happiness of her
brothers. If they cast her off--say they have nothing in the world for
her to do, and no place for her labors, she feels forsaken.

Sometimes indeed the thought arises that we are forsaken here in this
bright land, for where now are the Ladies' Missionary Societies, which
certainly did stir up to activity, faith and prayer? Vanished. Where the
funds which a few years ago ladies contributed and disbursed for
themselves? Given to the agents, and often with but little interest,
little love. I don't say _claimed_ by the agents or pastors for I don't
believe there is an enlightened pastor in the States who would not
rejoice to have the good old ways revived. They know how much their own
hands were strengthened.

Where now the female missionaries as in the days of Ann H. Judson and
Harriet Newel? Vanished--although missionary _"wives"_ have the same work
to do that they had when they were _"missionaries."_

Where the letters of women laboring in heathen lands to their sisters at
home? Vanished. And why?

Because missionary ladies generally don't like to talk their "women
talk," even if they could, through periodicals designed only for the
higher use of men, and conducted solely by men.


WIDOWS AND SINGLE LADIES.
It is brought as an objection to sending out young women and widows, that
the Church anciently chose only such as were sixty years old. By that
time they might be very infirm and need a pension or support from the
Church. It would seem as if that was the thought. But they were not to
receive any such attentions, unless they had all those years of widowhood
"relieved the afflicted, and _diligently followed every good work._" Of
course enlightening her pagan sisters came into the "every" catalogue,
especially as these instructions were given for women surrounded by
heathen.

I do not believe the apostle who recommended Phebe as one who had helped
a great many, would cut off all widows or single ladies, for his counsel
is: "I say to the _unmarried_ and _widows_, it is good for them if they
abide even as I." Why? Because "The unmarried woman careth for the things
of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit," implying
certainly, that she would have more time and opportunity to work for the
church than a married lady.

Some hesitate and object on the ground that young ladies will perhaps
wish to change their situation, even before they can do much good. To
guard against this, let them engage on the same terms that they do under
the Ladies' Society in England, that _if they desire to leave the work
within five years, they shall be at liberty to do so, but shall refund to
the Society the costs of sending them out._ This secures both parties
from any unpleasantness, and the Secretary of the English Society says:

"The experience of the Committee has amply justified the adoption of this
rule. It has invariably been found that those agents who have appeared
the most eminently suitable and devoted, have been the most ready and
forward to accede to the engagement, and have hailed it as a means of
silencing all insinuations of having acted under the influence of worldly
and selfish calculations. The sums already restored to this Society in
this manner amount to L1614."

Some of these ladies I have met in Calcutta and Madras, and I have
invariably found that if they had settled there they had done it for the
glory of God, and were now laboring with their husbands just as devotedly
as they were before.


FEMALE EDUCATION IN THE EAST.


Ladies in England have had a Society these twenty-five years expressly
for sending out and sustaining single ladies to work for heathen women,
and they have already themselves sent some two hundred into the field, at
a cost of many thousands of pounds. It is the "Society for Promoting
Female Education in the East," suggested by the sainted Abeel, and
encouraged by the Hon'ble Baptist Noel, which has its headquarters in
London, but auxiliaries in almost all the great cities in Great Britain
and some in Germany. The Societies' operations are conducted entirely by
ladies, and it has teachers in China, Burmah, Africa, Egypt, Turkey, and
very many parts of India.

These ladies publish a Female Missionary Intelligencer.

"Who but a woman," asks the Hon'ble B. Noel, "can understand the heart of
woman, and enter into all her difficulties and discouragements, and
bestow the tender consideration and the appropriate direction she
requires? A society of ladies has this additional advantage that it can
carry on its deliberations, and execute its plans in a quiet unobtrusive
manner, suited to the subordinate and retired position of the objects of
its solicitude."

"Even were the existing missionary societies able, which they acknowledge
they are not, to bestow upon this branch of the work all the time and
money, and exertion that it deserved it would still be advisable to adopt
the principle for which we plead--_that of a division of labor._"

This necessity has now been recognized and admitted throughout Great
Britain, and there are now three large _parent_ societies--one for all
denominations, the oldest and largest; one for the Free Church of
Scotland and one for the Methodist Church of Ireland.

This too opens a channel of communication between them and those who go
forth; while here in America there is nothing of the kind, and ladies
working abroad have no means of communicating with those working at home
for the same object. At least I know of none in this country.


WORDS FROM ENGLAND.


The following sweet words are from our sisters over the water:

"Thousands are now eager and willing to listen to the gospel message, to
whom as yet it comes not. Why? Because Christ's followers are too
straitened in heart, too cold in zeal, to spread abroad those tidings? It
may be that some, while professing much, hold back because that blessed
message has never been really received by themselves; but to those who
_have_ been taught to call Him by that sweet word, "Rabboni," "_My_
Master," does not that same voice call, to bid them hasten, (as Mary did
from the sepulchre) to tell others the news which has made them glad?

"Too often content with enjoying His salvation themselves, they forget to
arise and seek to make it known to others; and many whose sympathies and
efforts are ever ready for their own neighbors and countrymen, are slow
to extend them to those of distant lands. Yet the message is for those
poor neglected ones, as truly as for ourselves and our neighbors; and
could we once figure to our minds the state of the benighted, oppressed,
suffering women of India, Burmah, China, or Africa, and think of the
helpless and forsaken ones who might have lived and died faithful and
joyful followers of Jesus, but that _we_ were slow to convey to them the
tidings--that many of our dark sisters may reproach us one day in the
words of the poor Karen woman: "Why did no one come to tell this before?"
Oh, let us press onward not discouraged by the "many adversaries" we must
needs expect to find, adversaries without and within, "in nothing
discouraged," but secure in the knowledge that God is with us, and that
His cause must triumph at last!"

The Secretary, Miss Anne Rosamond Webb, who wrote the above, is a most
devoted laborer for heathen women.

She writes me, "How glad I should be if our friends in America would form
a sister Society to correspond with us on this all-important subject of
emancipating heathen women."


MARTYR WORK.


It is of course known to all, that the Protestant Missions in Burmah are
connected with the Am. Bap. Miss. Union, but need this hinder our sisters
of other denominations from joining in this blessed and deeply
interesting work?

God has opened a great and most encouraging field in Burmah, especially
in Tounghoo. He has sent out his Gospel Rangers, His translators,
printers, and school-book makers, and now every thing is ready for
Bible-women and female teachers to enter in, and I do not believe there
could be one noble-minded leader of the Union, of the American Board, or
of any other of the great Societies, who would raise a single objection,
as we would all act _together_ as an auxiliary to the Tounghoo Mission.
Ladies could then direct their own funds, and send out _their own sex to
their own sex_, holding direct communication with them, and yet, under
the patronage of gentlemen.

This is _martyr_ work, but in all martyr work let us ask a share, and I
am sure they'll give it to us. There is missionaries' work which woman
cannot and ought not to do. There is, too, mission work that man cannot
do without _coming down_ from his higher calling and degrading himself.


APPEAL TO ALL DENOMINATIONS.


I mentioned working _together_, because I really can see no good reason
why we should not. It is not _sectarianism_ that is wanted for the
nations, but a knowledge of Christ crucified and his precious promises
impressed on the mind and heart.

There are very many daughters of Missionaries, eight or ten of whom I
know personally, who are longing to return to Burmah and instruct those
heathen women--young ladies admirably qualified for the work, some of
whom even now speak the language, and would be so thankful for the
opportunity of going. It seems a very hard thing that they must be denied
the privilege. Only the other day, a returned Missionary wrote me that
two of her daughters were very desirous of going back to teach the
Burmese women. They were well prepared, and she wished to know if there
was no Ladies' Society that would send them.

May I not, then, appeal to the ladies of Christian America, of all
denominations, and ask if there are not some who will rejoice to aid in
this important and hopeful work? Are there not some who will feel it a
_privilege_ to give it their sympathies, their prayers, and their money?
Are there not some who will combine together and send in each, one dollar
for this purpose, or female societies already existing who will take it
up, and send out these daughters who are longing to go? Are there not
some who would be glad to have each one star in their crowns from
Tounghoo?

I appeal to my native land--to Baptists and to those who are not
Baptists--to members of churches and those who are not members. I appeal
to the young converts,--to all who love Christ and who are awaiting the
benediction: "She hath done what she could." I appeal to you because it
is peculiarly a work for _women_. Because it is a great work, and needs
great hearts and great _endurance_.

Since coming home I have had letters from several friends expressing
their warm sympathies in the undertaking, and hopefullness of its result.

One kind friend writes me that she apprehends the only obstacle with her
Society will be the _different versions_ of the Scriptures.

Would I could annihilate all hindrances to the emancipation of our pagan
sisters. Sometimes when I think what trifles break the flow of holy
sympathy, I long for Heaven where creeds and differences will vanish
away. For my own part, I would put a Douay Bible into the hands of a
heathen if I could get no other, and should hope he'd get light enough to
save him, too. In Tounghoo the converts know only one broad mark--"_Is he
a disciple, or is he not?_"

Of course it would be ruinous to set these young converts to disputing
about the different versions of God's Holy Word, but Mr. Mason is
translating into Bghai many portions of the Scriptures for the Calcutta
Bible Society, which is auxiliary to the Brit. and For. Bible Soc. He
does not translate the whole for them, but many parts. And what I propose
is this--that if any of the sisters, not connected with the Baptists,
will unite in this work, Mr. Mason will select from the Burmese Bible the
same portions which the Brit. and For. Bible Soc. patronizes in Karen.
These could easily be bound together, and the Readers should limit their
distribution and their readings entirely to those parts; _and these
contain knowledge enough to save any heathen soul from death._


BISHOP WILSON'S WORDS.


That sainted Father, Bishop Wilson, whose heart was as large as the
world, made some striking remarks one morning while I was breakfasting
with him, about as follows: "I used to think we must keep to the old
ways, but I have come to the conclusion that Christians ought to work
together in everything just as far as they can, and in sympathies and
labors for the heathen it is our _privilege_ to be united." And he acted
in accordance with his high-minded sentiments, for he immediately handed
me a check for a hundred rupees to my contemplated school. If the ladies
would take up this subject, I know Mr. Mason and Mr. Cross would be
delighted to keep them informed of the progress of their sappers and
miners among the powers of darkness.

It will not be asked in Heaven whether the Tounghoo women were saved by
Episcopalians or Congregationalists, Dutch Reformed, Presbyterians,
Methodists or Baptists, but all may be sure, if they've any stars there,
they'll be set up in their crowns of glory. Friends in India, don't ask
this question, for the work of evangelizing Tounghoo has been supported
almost entirely by Christian Officers and Civilians who were no Baptists
at all.


"ALL IS GONE."


Another friend writes: "If there were women on the ground, he feels sure
the ladies of his Society would undertake their support to almost any
number, 'but to what extent they will assume the responsibility of
_sending out women_ for the purpose, I cannot," he says, "conjecture." I
answer, the women are _not_ on the ground--that is, only a very few.
Female Readers _must go and raise up the native helpers_--and if this
cannot be done, I dispair of all hope for the women of Tounghoo, and the
words of the poor Burman will be made true, who came several miles to
hear of Christ, on our first going to that region. After listening with
patient attention for more than an hour, she replied:

"I think--I think I shall believe--your words sound good. Somehow they
seem to make my heart light. But you are going away. How can we believe?
If there was only somebody to instruct us. The sun has risen a little way
up, but when you leave, it will sink back, _and all is gone._"

Oh, can I ever forget that heathen woman as she gazed upward, with tears
falling down her care-worn face? Or the utter hopelessness of her eye
when her hands fell drooping in the attitude of despair, as she uttered
_"All is gone!"_

Oh, my God, let not the blood of these heathen mothers and daughters be
found on me! Let them not cry to me in the great assembling of eternity!

In less than one hundred years these troops of interesting women, who
came to see me, will be _dead_--all the 25,000 Burmese, Shan and Talaing
women of Tounghoo will be _dead_--the three millions of heathen women in
Burmah will be _dead_--I shall be _dead_--you will be _dead_--the members
of your churches and societies will be _dead_--and what a meeting shall
we have if we let them perish!

Why will not the young converts enlist in this plan for the redemption of
their pagan sisters? Within two or three years God has so greatly blessed
America! I appeal to you, Christian sisters, if he has not greatly
blessed _you?_ and would it not be delightful now to make him a
thank-offering?


"SHALL BE DONE."


When the Lord forgave Mannassah, he not only cast away his idols, but he
brought a thank-offering to the Lord. Perhaps you have already made your
thank-offerings. So had Jacob built a great many altars, but when God
told him, after a great deliverance, to go and build another altar right
_in the midst of the heathen_, he did it--that _they_ might hear of his
Wonderful Deliverer.

I can never think of thank-offerings, but that beautiful story of Hannah
comes up.

When God heard her prayer, and granted her petition, she did'nt forget
it. See her carrying her darling boy--as soon as ever he was weaned--up
to the temple, and leaving him there _as a loan to the Lord!_ How lovely!
And Elkanah, was'nt he a noble soul? "Do what seemeth thee good," he says
so _trustingly_ to his wife--and he did'nt forbid her the bullocks, or
the flour, or the wine.

Then how light that mother's heart, as she started off to carry the
little fellow his pretty coat every year! and what tears of holy joy must
have filled her eyes as she remembered that her thank-offering to God was
something that she valued as her own life.

It would'nt require but 2,000 names to do all that I have asked for
Tounghoo. If just 2,000 women would start out on the one dollar
system--make an extra loan to the Lord of $100 a piece, and then bring up
their _little coats_ of a dollar each without fail _every year_, the work
would be done. They could send out and support two Bible Readers from
this country who could reach Rangoon in _eight weeks_--who would go with
the four native readers _for them_--with their messages right to the
doors of those heathen women, and _continue_ going, for they would'nt
have to leave the work as mothers do to attend to other business. And
they could send with them a teacher for the Burmese Training School, and
support her with two assistants permanently.

Oh, if Christian ladies would take hold of this work just _for five
years_--I ask only to have it tried for five years--with earnestness,
with perseverance, with faith, and prayer--would they not dig up some
precious jewels from Tounghoo for their Master? Yes, verily--for "As the
rain cometh down and returneth not again, but watereth the earth and
maketh it bring forth and bud, so shall _My Word be_, and it _shall
prosper_ in the thing whereto I sent it."


OUR STRENGTH IN GOD.


I know that "The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God," and that
all our plans, if we trust in them, are but spider's webs, but the 11th
chapter of Hebrews was not given for nothing, and we have a COUNSELLOR
the WONDERFUL.

"To them that have no might he increaseth strength," and

"Though he be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly."

The same God who said to a wrestling man, "I AM GOD ALMIGHTY," said
"_Mary_" to a sorrowing woman. And

_"That I have spoken shall be performed," saith the

"FAITHFUL PROMISER."


DR. DUFF'S SENTIMENTS.


Hear Dr. Duff's sentiments, addressing the Ladies' Foreign Missionary
Society of Scotland:

"In the department of Female Education, whose intrinsic importance cannot
be over-estimated, it will be seen that our Mission is at last beginning
to make decided progress. At all our stations we have now one or more
female schools, and I beg to be distinctly understood, that for these
_not a single farthing is taken from the general Mission Fund_. It is due
to the Ladies' Society that this fact should be clearly apprehended. That
Society I have always regarded as a constituent member of our great
Mission Scheme, without which we should now be painfully hobbling on one
leg, instead of walking steadily on two. Your place now and your
responsibilities in the great Mission Scheme of our Church, are clearly
set before you. _You have undertaken to do for the one sex that which the
Foreign Mission Scheme is doing for the other. There can be no more
mistake about that now._ Without you the Mission would be one-sided and
incomplete. You supplement what was wanting to it. You act not in
antagonism either abroad or at home to the other side of the Scheme. The
funds of the foreign Mission and of your Society meet in the Treasuries
of the Mission Boards abroad, and are thence distributed in fertilizing
streams over that portion of the vineyard which is given to each to
cultivate.

"Realize then, Ladies, your high calling and the magnitude of your
undertaking. Let the ladies, to whose devoted labors and patient
continuance in well-doing, the Church is so much indebted for the
maintenance and furtherance of all her schemes, not be wanting in this
grace also, one of the most seemly and suitable they can possess--that of
dedicating themselves, and their influence, and their means, _to rescue
their own sex_ from the thraldom of a cruel bondage and a degrading
superstition. The work to be done is a great work, both at home and
abroad. We want more givers. We want more collectors. We want more
teachers. We want more prayers and perseverance, and working and praying,
and praying and working, for this good cause."

Dr. and Mrs. Duff are both engaged now in this work. He says: "Our school
for high-caste Brahmin girls is coming up wonderfully. We have now fifty
pupils, and opposition is breaking down."

Every one knows that Dr. Duff is at the head of the great Duff
Institution, for young men, and yet he can condescend to go to work for
degraded women. The Lord bless him, and all those noble-souled brothers
who are not ashamed to face opposition and help the weak.


Christian Mothers and their Children.

An Orient morn is gushing,
     O'er the hills and jungle glades,
And an Orient sky is blushing
     Through the palm trees' lofty shades,
Hear'st the roll of the Sepoy's drumming?
     The bugle sounding loud?
With the hum of the maidens coming
     To the tank in a tawny crowd?

Yes, with the home-tones blending,
     On the lawns and the ancient wall,
While turbaned brows are bending,
     Where the coco shadows fall;
While silk _patsoes_ are fluttering,
     And sandaled feet go by,
And pagod bells are uttering
     New strains of minstrelsy.

And see now the bulbouls ranging,
     Brightening the mango trees;
While the sun-birds lightening, changing,
     Are wreathing the fragrant breeze.
O yes, and the limes are blowing,
     And the champacs waving bright;
And the rivers in rainbows glowing,
     Are ringing: "'Tis light! 'tis light!"

Yet we mothers heed little these pleasures,
     Our children are our dearest flowers.
Our roses--our waters--our treasures--
     Soft claiming the loveliest hours.
Nor do love-vigils ever fling o'er us
     Paleness or sorrowing;
_'Tis the partings heart-breaking before us_.
     That trembling and shadowing bring.

These dear little ones we so cherish,
     Now flashing with love and delight,
O will they, when earth-treasures perish,
     In bliss greet our fond eager sight?
Or will our sweet flowers then be riven,
     And scattered, lie withering away?
Be torn from the glories of heaven,
     Eternally banished from day?

With fears and with yearnings here sighing,
     We're waiting for pitying Love--
Save! save them, God! we're crying
     To bloom in thy gardens above!
And lo, while in agony pleading,
     Faith clinging, though shattered and driven.
Love, pointing to Hands ever bleeding,
     Soft whispers: "_My jewels in heaven._"


Heathen Mothers and their Children.

Mournfully, fearfully,
     Lonely, distrest,
Falteringly, tearfully,
     Children unblest
     Are seeking their rest,
     With no mother's breast
     To gladden their eyes,
     Or quiet their sighs.
From the buffalo fight,
     From bazaar or the race.
When almost night,
     With a weary pace,
     The mother comes home,
     Her blood in a foam,
     All anger and gloom,
     Dread as a tomb!
     Now, what screeching!
     And tearful beseeching!
     Neighbors flocking,
     O, so shocking!

And now through the lattice
     Look on the floor,
Where that old mat is,
     Close by the door.
Quickly, for O!
     A scene will appear,
Little Meemboo
     Kneeling in fear!
See her lips tremble,
     Her eyes how they stare!
And what may resemble
     Her burnt matted hair?
There! there the dread mother
     Screaming around--
The hard heathen mother,
While the poor little brother
     Lies on the ground--
     Crushed down to the ground.

O Saviour, appear!
Pity, and hear
     The children's wild cry
     Ascending the sky!
The soul-thrilling moans,
The deep muffled groans.
     That roll o'er the strand
     Of this guilty land!
Lo, yonder she drags
     The child to a boat,
Flings her some rags,
     And soon is afloat.
Where will she carry her
     All in a shiver?
Will she not bury her
     Down in the river?
No, no, she's meeting
And fiendfully greeting
     A wretch in the wild!
Ha! what is she telling?
O God! she's selling
     Her poor little child!
Ah, will he then take her--
     A lamb to the slaugher?
And can she forsake her
     Her own little daughter?
     Her _dear_ little daughter?
Departed--departed--
     Meemboo's a _slave_,
To weep broken-hearted
     Down to the grave--
Or with a brigand,
     Away to his clan.
In the wild robber land
     Of dark Martaban!*
Again that mother
     Turns to her boy,
Think of it sister,
Think of it brother,
     A _mother_ destroy!
She'll watch and she'll teach him
     Compassion is vain.
Till no mercy can reach him,
     And he'll revel in pain.
She'll learn him to fight,
     She'll learn him deceit,
That hatred is right,
     That revenge is sweet;
She'll lead him to light
     Never--O never--
But down into night,
     Till he's lost forever,
     _Aye, forever!_

[Footnote: *Meemboo was Mrs. Howard's pupil, having been redeemed out of
slavery by the Rev. Mr. Howard, then of Maulmain, much to the chagrin of
the cruel mother, who did herself sell her child to a man of the robber
haunt of Martaban.]



_To the Editor of the Examiner:_


Will you let me say a word to those sisters who have read the strictures
in your paper on my appeal for Bible Readers for the women of Tounghoo,
which I saw first to-day. If I knew who the friend was that wrote those
strictures, I would go and see him, because a few points he has
misapprehended. Tounghoo is a mission of itself, independent, as I have
understood Mr. Mason, of all other missions. I did not suppose it was
necessary to get the authority of other missions, especially as my
husband was the only missionary in the Province when I left. The writer
thinks I belong to a Karen mission only. I don't know how that is. I know
Mr. Mason has always felt himself at liberty to work for the Burmese, and
has done so very extensively, and he speaks the Burmese language as well
as the Karen. Then again, there are 25,000 heathen women in Tounghoo, and
not a soul to speak to them of a Saviour's love, or rescue them from the
agonies of eternal death. I did not think it would be sinful in me to
_try_ to help them.

The writer says missionaries "_have_ appropriations for native
assistants." They have, it is true, all that the churches provide, or
send in to the Board for this purpose; but Mr. Mason has 200 native
assistants in the Karen department alone, and last year his
appropriations amounted _not quite to fifty cents apiece!_ Not a cent for
our fifty Karen female assistants; not a cent for the Burmese men or
women. The heathen women of that whole Province are dying and perishing
eternally.

Some complain that I came without _authority_. Had the missions sent one
to the churches, they would have sent a man of course. I did come without
authority in my own poor name, because I appealed only _to_ women and
_for_ women. In England, Scotland, Ireland and Germany, females are
allowed to organize societies of their own, and send out teachers and
readers of their own sex.

To those who doubt Mr. Mason's views, I would say he knew nothing of my
application for Bible readers, as I came home expressly for teachers for
the Institute and Burmese training school. The thought of Bible readers
for the Burmese women had often occurred to me, but it was not until I
met Mrs. Ranyard in London that I determined to try now for that object.
I have no doubt but Mr. Mason will give the plan his warmest support.

He writes Dr. Warren:
"Perhaps Mrs. Mason will be with you, when this reaches you. Please aid
her in her plans for female education, and send her back to her work as
quick as possible."

It is possible that others in Burmah might even disapprove of the plan
proposed. It is certain it has not been tried to any extent, and there
are not one thousand converted Burmese women in all Burmah--at least I
think not. Ought not, then, _something_ to be tried? If not Bible
readers, something else, by which these women shall hear the gospel so as
to understand it.

ELLEN B. MASON.
BROOKLYN, July 5th, 1860.


THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia
