

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Schoolmaster and Felicia
Author: A E W Mason
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1100141.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: February 2011
Date most recently updated: February 2011

This eBook was produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Schoolmaster and Felicia
Author: A E W Mason

*

(Author of "Miranda of the Balcony," &c).

*

Published in The Queenslander, Saturday 6 January, 1906.

*



"You will call at the Villa Pontignard at noon to-morrow. The Duchess
will herself receive you," said the butler, with a superb condescension,
and he paced away up the narrow winding streets of Roquebrune,
wondering, with perhaps a little contempt for the incomprehensible
eccentricities of rank, what in the world the Duchess of Pontignard
could have in common with a little village schoolmaster that she should
be at the pains to command his presence.

The schoolmaster, however, had no doubts as to the reason of the
summons. He leaned over the parapet of the tiny square before the
schoolhouse, and from head to foot he tingled and glowed. It was his
brochure upon the history of the village--written with what timidity,
printed at what cost to his meagre purse!--which had brought him this
recognition from the great lady of the villa upon the spur of the hill.
Turning about, he could just see, as he looked upwards, the white walls
of that villa glimmering through the dusk, he could imagine its garden
of trim lawns and oleanders and dark cypresses falling back from bank to
bank in ordered tiers down the hill-side.

"To-morrow at noon," he repeated, and he turned back again with a shiver
of fear at the thought of mistakes in behaviour which he was likely to
make. How did one meet a Duchess? Did one bow or did one kiss her hand?
What if she asked him to breakfast? There would be unfamiliar dishes to
be eaten with particular forks. Sometimes a knife should be used,
sometimes not. He looked down the steep slope of the rock, on the summit
of which the village was perched, and again anticipation got the better
of fear. A long lane of steps led winding down, and his eyes followed
its descent, as his feet had often done, to the little railway station
by the sea, through which people journeyed to and fro between the great
cities. His eyes followed the signal lights towards another station of
many lamps far away to the right; and, as he looked, there blazed out
suddenly, just above that station, other lights of a great size, and an
extraordinary glowing brilliancy, lights which had the look of amazing
jewels. They were the lights on the terrace at Monte Carlo. The
schoolmaster had walked there on his rare mornings of leisure, had sat
unnoticed on the benches, devouring with his eyes the passers-by, all
worship of the women in their elegant frocks, all envy of the men for
their composure of manner and indifference to scrutiny or
remark--wonderful beings, with one of whom he was to speak, actually to
speak, at noon to-morrow.

The schoolmaster was not a snob. The visit which he was bidden to pay
was to him not so much a step upwards as outwards. In this little
village set apart on its mountainside, built into it--for everywhere in
the streets the rock cropped up between the houses, and the streets
themselves climbed through tunnels of rock--he was tormented with
visions of great cities and thoroughfares ablaze, he longed for the
jostle of men striving one against the other, he craved for
companionship as a fainting man craves for air. "To-morrow at noon," he
said to himself. The stars came out above his head; they had never shone
brighter; the Mediterranean, dark and noiseless, swept out at his feet
beyond the woods of Cap Martin. But his eyes turned constantly to the
glowing terrace of Monte Carlo, or were bent directly downwards to the
little station and its signal lights.

The Duchess, an elderly lady, who had long since retired from the world,
received him the next morning with a simplicity which put him at his
ease. She held his brochure in her hand, and she bowed to him. There was
a look of relief on the schoolmaster's face as he returned the bow. She
had not held out her hand.

"You are a native of Roquebrune, Monsieur?" said she.

"No, Madame," he answered, "my father was a peasant at Aigues-Mortes. I
was born there."

The Duchess nodded in approval of the simplicity of his reply.

"Yet you write, if one who is unlettered may say it without presumption,
with the love of a native for his village."

The flattery unlocked, at it was intended to do, the schoolmaster's
heart. The Duchess made him sit down, and he found himself, to his
intense astonishment, confiding to this gracious old lady truths about
himself without any feeling of confusion or timidity.

"It was not love for Roquebrune which led me to write the little book,"
said he. "But I have always had, I think, longings almost too vague for
me to express even to myself. When I came here upon my appointment as
schoolmaster, I was not content with the children's lessons for my
working hours, and the two wine-shops for my leisure. I was not content.
I took long walks over Cap Martin to Mentone, along the Corniche road to
La Turbie, up the hillside towards Mount Agel. But still, as Madame will
understand, I had my thoughts, my longings as continual companions; and
at last, since everywhere I saw traces of antiquity, and heard something
of the attacks by Algerian pirates, I thought to write this history as a
relief. Once I had begun it, I found that so many mistakes were current,
I took a pleasure in putting them right. There are so many. For
instance, the belief that the old Roman road is the present Corniche,
whereas----"

"Whereas," the Duchess interrupted gently, "the readers of your brochure
know that that is not so."

She had no wish whatever to hear details about the level of the old
Roman road over the Alps. She deftly brought the schoolmaster back to
discourse about himself, and in the end was satisfied. Therefore she
told the reason for which she had summoned him.

"My daughter, Monsieur, is now 17. It will be my duty soon to present
her to the world, but I would have her educated first as completely as
possible. It is not easy to obtain a governess proficient in every
branch, and I will not part with her. I thought, therefore, that I might
be able to arrange with you to read history with her during your spare
hours."

The schoolmaster felt his head turning. That he was the recipient of the
great lady's charity he was not for an instant aware, and, indeed, it
was intended that he should not be. The Duchess had noticed this poor
solitary youth, had pitied him on account of his poverty, and had thus
found her way in some measure to relieve it. She had the firmest faith
in her instincts, she had sounded the man, she believed him trustworthy,
and by offering him this work she would be augmenting his pittance and
not diminishing, but, on the contrary, increasing, his self respect.

From that time, therefore, on three afternoons a week, the schoolmaster
climbed up to the villa. And if he taught the daughter Felicia a little,
a very little history, he got from her much more instruction than he
gave. For in the intervals of their reading they talked, and generally
upon the one point they had in common, their curiosity as to the life of
the world beyond their village. Felicia knew no more of that world
really than he did, her ideas of it were as visionary and as dream-like
as his, but they were not his, as he was quick to recognise. The
instincts of her class, her traditions, the influence of her mother were
all audible in her words.

One day she said to him: "You let me always talk now. Why have you grown
silent, Monsieur?"

"You know more than I do."

"I?" she exclaimed, and then she laughed. "Really we both know nothing.
We only guess, and guess. But it is pleasant work guessing, isn't it?
Then why have you stopped?"

"I will tell you, Mademoiselle. It is because I have come to guess
through your eyes. I see the world through them."

Felicia looked out for a little while over the Mediterranean. They were
sitting on a terrace of the garden among the cypresses, and the whistle
of a "Rapide" mounted through the still air to their ears.

"Well," said Felicia, with a sigh of impatience, "we shall both know the
truth sometime, and soon."

It was understood, of course, that this undisciplined village
schoolmaster was to leave Roquebrune and carve out a career. When and by
what means were questions which had not been considered. The
schoolmaster himself might have considered them, might have doubted,
but, as he had said, he looked out at the world through Felicia's eyes.
And she had no doubts. With a girl's oblivion of obstacles she was
convinced that somehow the thing would happen. Meanwhile the
schoolmaster's longings, fostered in this way three times a week, grew
and consumed him.

Then he came one afternoon to the terrace with his eyes fevered and his
face drawn.

"You are ill," said Felicia. "We will not work to-day."

"It is nothing," he replied. "Two travellers came up to Roquebrune
yesterday. I met them walking by the church. I spoke to them, and showed
them the village, and took them by that short cut of the steps down to
the railway station. They were from Paris. They talked of Paris. I have
not slept all night," and he clasped and unclasped his hands.

Felicia looked down at her history, and said: "Hannibal crossed the
Alps. You must go to Paris. Why not become a Deputy?" and she clapped
her hands as the idea occurred to her.

"A Deputy?" exclaimed the schoolmaster, flashing with pride.

"Of course," said Felicia, utterly amazed that she had not thought of so
simple a solution before. Hannibal's passage of the Alps was forgotten
for that afternoon, and Felicia's project was developed instead. The
ways and means of becoming a Deputy were of course left out of the
question. The schoolmaster was to become a Deputy. Therefore he was as
good as a Deputy already. They started with the premise that he was a
Deputy, and the Deputy's future was mapped out. Felicia was to marry,
someone of course who loved her very dearly, but the someone was to be,
at the same time, a person of great importance. Felicia would have a
salon with weekly reunions of distinguished people, where the rising
young politician, who had once been a State schoolmaster at Roquebrune,
was to be introduced to proper notice. Felicia saw no difficulties. He
must have a dress-suit, that was all. She even got so far as describing,
from hearsay, the imposing public funeral of a President of the
Republic. And the schoolmaster still saw the world through her eyes.

But the time came when the history books were shut, and Felicia prepared
for her first season in Paris. Frocks and hats drove the fortunes of the
schoolmaster from her thoughts, and it was with a feeling of remorse
that she met him one afternoon in the street of Roquebrune, and received
his wishes for a safe journey and a time of much enjoyment.

"But I shall miss our quiet afternoons on the terrace," she said,
speaking out of her friendliness rather than out of her convictions.
"Besides, I shall come back to Roquebrune," she added quickly, "and you
are to come to Paris too. That is arranged, is it not?"

And so Felicia went to Paris, and the schoolmaster lost his one glimpse
of the outer world. But he lived upon the recollections of it. He took
again to his long walks on the Corniche road, sustained by Felicia's
conviction that some day, it might be on this very evening, the
miraculous opportunity would be discovered, and he would find himself
transported to Paris. The summer came, and he heard that Felicia was at
Dieppe. During the autumn he caught sight of her name now and then in
one of the Riviera newspapers, as a guest at this or that country house.
Finally, in December, he was told that she was returning to her mother
at the Villa Pontignard. There was to be a house party to welcome her
return. From the moment when he learnt that, the schoolmaster became an
assiduous frequenter of the platform at the station.

No Rapide passed from France through the station on its way to Italy
during his leisure hours but he was there to watch its passengers. It
was not merely his friend who was returning, but his instructor, and
with new and wonderful knowledge added to the old. So he watched with a
thrill half of longing, half of fear. And at last he saw her descend
with her maid from her carriage. He experienced the relief of a man who
has regained his eyesight; she was his window on the outer world. He
followed her, he spoke to her, and she turned towards him. She gave him
her hand, she said easily some simple words of friendliness, and at once
he was aware of the vast gulf between them. With a woman's inimitable
quickness she had acquired in these few months the ease, the polish, the
armour of a woman of the world. She was of the world now, the great
outside world; he was still the village schoolmaster, and he stood
confused before her. She spoke again, asking after his school. He could
barely answer her.

"But you must come up to the villa," she said. "We have much to talk
over. I have much to tell you," and so she stepped lightly into her
carriage, and was driven up the road.

But she had nothing to tell him. The schoolmaster stood upon the
platform and knew. The afternoons upon the terrace, the speculations,
the encouragements, these things were of the past. His window was
darkened, he would never find his way out of the room, he felt it very
surely. But none the less he went up to the villa that evening. He did
not go to the house, he crept through the garden to the terrace, and sat
there in the shadow of a cypress. He could hear music within the house,
and the sound of laughter, and all at once he heard voices speaking in
the night air, and drawing nearer to where he sat. He had not time to
slip away, and he sat in the shade of the cypress while Felicia and a
youth walked down upon the terrace. The youth wore one of those
dress-suits, which the schoolmaster must procure before he could figure
in Felicia's salon as a rising politician, but he wore it with a grace
which the schoolmaster knew, did he live to be a hundred, he could never
counterfeit.

"My cousin," said Felicia, "I have spent many hours upon this terrace."

"Of all those hours," replied the cousin, "I am very jealous, and the
more jealous because you speak of them with regret."

"Regret, not on my own account," replied Felicia.

She was silent for a little while, and the schoolmaster could see the
feathers of her fan waving to and fro in the starlight. He sat still as
a mouse, for he saw the world through Felicia's eyes. He had the more
reason to see it now after her sojourn there. She continued:

"The schoolmaster came up from the village to read history with me here.
It was a plan of mother's. He was poor, lonely, and she pitied him. He
became my friend. We both knew nothing, and so we were less hampered in
making plans. He was to become a Deputy. How, the good God most decide.
I was to marry--oh! not him, there was no thought of that, but some
great person, and hold salons at which my Deputy would figure----"

"What nonsense!" interrupted the cousin in a voice of irritation.

"No doubt, no doubt," said Felicia, with just a hint of sadness, "but it
was rather pretty nonsense."

The schoolmaster climbed down to Roquebrune as soon as the terrace was
empty.

He still saw the world through Felicia's eyes, but now he saw through
the same eyes--himself, the poor, half-educated peasant, feeding upon
vain dreams, and accepting the Duchess's charity as a recognition of
merit. He leaned over the parapet of the little square before the
school-house, and thought of the singing drone of the children whom he
taught. His eyes wandered away to the glowing terrace of Monte Carlo,
and came back to the little station and its signal-lights at his feet,
although the Mediterranean slept about the pines of Cap Martin, and the
stars above his head had never shone brighter.


THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia
