
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Ghosts
Author: Arthur Gask
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1202381.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: June 2012
Date most recently updated: June 2012

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: Ghosts
Author: Arthur Gask

*

Published in The Mail, Adelaide, S.A., Saturday 8 April, 1944.

*



It was the ending of the fourth day of the 'Hylden versus Hylden and
Carnarvon' divorce case, and excitement was running high. Not, indeed,
that there had been any excitement in the court itself for His Honor,
Judge Bevan-Royal, was a stern martinet, and emotion was given no rein
when he was presiding on the Bench.

Fifty-five years of age, he had been admitted to the practice of the law
in the Old Country some 30 years previously. Migrating, however, to
South Australia, he had soon made his mark, and at 45 had been elevated
to the Bench. Of an austere morality, and with a well-known distaste for
dealing with cases of matrimonial infidelity, it was nevertheless
generally conceded he was by far the best divorce judge in the State.
Devoid of sentiment and cold as ice where a pretty face was concerned,
it was agreed on all sides that in any case he was handling he would
hold the scales of justice to the balance of the finest gossamer of a
spider's web.

Never influenced in the slightest degree by the most passionate appeal
of counsel, and, indeed, regarding all their eloquence as an attempt to
fog the issues involved, his mind would sink like a plummet to the
bottom rock of facts, and guilt or innocence was determined by him in an
atmosphere as calm and still as that of an age-old hermetically sealed
tomb.

But if there had been no apparent excitement in the court it was very
different outside, as Sir Miles and Lady Hylden were among the
best-known figures in society circles in Adelaide, and Dr. Carnarvon was
one of its most promising young medical men. The knight was a wealthy
man in the middle fifties, and his wife, the lovely Madelaine Adair
before her marriage, was nearly 30 years younger than he. They had been
married two years, and there were no children. Madelaine was Sir Miles'
third wife.

It was the old, old story, of an elderly lover passionately enamored of
a young girl, and she marrying him for position and all that wealth
could give.

By no means could it be said that Sir Miles was a pleasant character,
either in looks or ways. Short and stout, with his head coming straight
off his shoulders, he had a red, vein-lined face and hard, searching
eyes. Undoubtedly, however, he was most capable, and, with the courage
and tenacity of a bull-dog, he had bullied his way to fortune, and in
his colorful life obtained nearly all he wanted. He had wanted
Madelaine, and he had got her, like everything else--by purchase.

On her part, Madelaine was of some character, and certainly no weakling.
With never any real affection for her husband, she might yet have made
him a good wife if she had ever learnt to respect him, but, with his
passion for her quickly cooling, he had lost all interest in her, and
was soon on the look-out again for favors from any pretty woman who
happened to take his fancy. Also, of late, he had become a hard and
heavy drinker.

So, less than a year after their marriage, they had both begun to go
their own ways. Madelaine had been the bright society butterfly,
enjoying herself as best she could, and, with no interference from her
husband, making her own circle of friends.

Then, suddenly, and without the slightest warning, Sir Miles had pulled
her up with a jerk, accused her of unfaithfulness, turned her out of the
house, and had the papers served, naming Dr. Carnarvon as the
co-respondent. He claimed £5,000 damages. Both Lady Hylden and the
doctor strenuously denied the charge, and the cream of the South
Australian Bar had been briefed by the contending parties.

In the course of the proceedings in the court two very different
pictures of Sir Miles had been given. In one he had been held up as an
affectionate, very wronged, and very shocked husband, who had suddenly
found himself betrayed by the one man above all others he should have
been able to trust--the family medical adviser. In the other, he had
been portrayed as the neglecting and unscrupulous husband who, getting
tired of his wife and scheming to be rid of her, had deliberately thrown
her as much as possible in the doctor's way, just biding his time until
be thought he had accumulated enough evidence of guilt against her.

He told the court he had had no suspicions at all until one night,
coming home from a public dinner a good hour before he was expected, he
had seen a man rush out from one of the french windows, and get away by
scaling the garden wall. He had recognised the man as Dr. Carnarvon.

At once instituting inquiries, he had learnt the doctor had been in the
habit of paying secret visits to the house, not coming up openly in his
car, but parking the car in an unfrequented lane some hundreds of yards
away.

In the witness box both Lady Hylden and the doctor had denied the secret
visits, and, referring to the particular night when Sir Miles averred he
had recognised the doctor running from the house, Madelaine had sworn
she had had no visitors at all that evening, adding scornfully that, if
she had had one, her husband had certainly been in no condition to
recognise who he was, as he, Sir Miles, had been three-parts intoxicated
when he had arrived home.

In the course of the trial, what was considered as one of the strongest
points made by counsel against Madelaine had been that her personal
maid, who had been turned out of the house at the same time as her
mistress, had most mysteriously disappeared directly after she had had
been served with a subpoena to attend the court. If she had been put in
the witness box, insisted counsel, from her would have been dragged the
damning admission of the many secret visits of Dr. Carnarvon. Making
matters look even worse, it had been shown that the day before the girl
had disappeared Madelaine had cashed a cheque for £100.

It was true, Madelaine had explained this cheque by stating she had
drawn it to use at the races. As, however, it was well known she had
never taken much interest in racing, and, indeed, could not mention one
single horse on which she had ever placed more than £1, the explanation
had been regarded by everyone as very weak and unconvincing.

With the adjournment of the court on the fourth afternoon, Judge
Bevan-Royal retired to his private room, and, taking off his wig and
disrobing, leant back tiredly in a big arm-chair, and thoughtfully
considered the three parties in the case. He had met them all socially.
Sir Miles he detested, he could not help admiring the wife, and, from
what he had seen of Dr. Carnarvon, he liked him.

Of course, however, Lady Hylden and the doctor were guilty! There could
be so doubt about that and on the morrow he would grant the petition for
the dissolution of the marriage. But he had no sympathy with the
husband, and would give him no damages. By his neglect and general
manner of living he had contributed to his wife's infidelity. At any
rate, he looked a satyr, and, possibly, nay probably, was every bit as
bad as she was.

Had not he, Bevan-Royal, with his own eyes, seen him making up to that
young widow-woman at that garden party the previous week? Yes, he had
watched him ogling her in that horrid way. Perhaps he would marry her
next and she would be wife number four.

He was sorry for Dr. Carnarvon. It would mean utter ruin for him, even
if his name was not removed from the medical register. But then he had
gone into things with his eyes open, and he must take the consequences.

His meditations were interrupted by an attendant knocking on the door
and entering the room. "A young gentleman would like to speak to Your
Honor," he said. "His name is Smith, and he says he comes from England."

"Smith!" exclaimed the judge. "What does he want?"

"He says his business is private, Your Honor, but he'll only keep you a
minute or two."

"Show him in," frowned the judge, and a smart young man in the uniform
of the mercantile marine was ushered in. He was unusually good-looking,
with a smiling, open countenance.

"Judge Bevan-Royal?" he asked. "Then, pardon my troubling you, sir," he
went on, "but I come under peculiar circumstances. My mother died rather
suddenly some six months ago, and I found among her things an old
newspaper cutting of many years back, saying you had been made a judge
here in Adelaide. Never having heard her speak of you, I was curious if
she had ever known you, and thought that if ever I were in Adelaide, I
would come and see you to find out."

The judge's eyes were hooded, and he was regarding his visitor intently.
"What was your mother's Christian name?" he asked after a few moments'
hesitation.

"Gertrude, sir," was his reply. "She was a hospital nurse."

"Then I did know her," nodded the judge. "She nursed me through a very
serious illness, and, the doctors said, saved my life. I have always had
most grateful feelings for her." He frowned. "I wrote to her after I had
come out here, but the letter was returned through the Dead Letter
Office. She had gone away, and left no address."

"She did it on purpose, sir," said the boy. "She didn't want my father
to know where she was. He had been very unkind to her, and she had left
him before I was born. I have never seen him, and do not even know if he
is alive."

"Then you are the only child?" said the judge. "How old are you?"

"Twenty-five next birthday, sir," replied the boy. He spoke proudly. "I
am first officer on s.s. Nerbudda."

They chatted on for quite awhile, and, learning the boy would be in
Adelaide until the following afternoon, the judge invited him to dinner
at a hotel that evening, They had a very pleasant meal together, and, in
parting, the judge asked him to write to him occasionally, adding that
if ever he could be of any service to him, he would be most happy to do
all he could.

The judge slept badly that night, and the next morning, when he took his
seat on the Bench, it was noticed he was paler than usual. The court was
crowded. Lady Hylden was not present, but both Sir Miles and Dr.
Carnarvon were. Sir Miles looked vindictively confident, but the doctor,
though he tried not to show it, was obviously ill at ease. The
spectators, generally, having little doubt what the judgment was going
to be, thought it very plucky on the doctor's part, to be intending to
receive the blow in public.

In a profound and impressive silence, the judge commenced in calm,
unhurried tones. He regretted, he said, that none of the parties to the
case had impressed him very favorably, as, undoubtedly, much of the
testimony given had been exaggerated, even to the point of deliberate
falsehood. The petitioner had exaggerated to support his contention of
the respondents' guilt, and they had exaggerated in their insistence on
their innocence.

Referring specifically to the petitioner, the judge went on, it was
surely hard to credit that, if the guilty association of his wife with
Dr. Carnarvon had been continuing for so long, he would have had no
suspicions of what was happening until the full realisation of it came
to him on that particular night--as he put it--with the suddenness of a
clap of thunder.

He had admitted, he had allowed--even more than that--that he had
encouraged Dr. Carnarvon to be his wife's escort on many occasions.
Himself engrossed in business matters, he had asked the doctor to
deputise for him, and, in consequence, the two had gone about together
to pictures, theatres, concerts, and other public functions. His
contention was that his only motive had been to give his wife pleasure,
and that he was exposing her to danger had never entered into his mind.

Yet, the petitioner was a shrewd, alert, and far-seeing man, as was
evidenced by his business successes, and, surely, it would have been
imagined, he would have been one of the last persons not to have noticed
what was going on under his very eyes, and seen whither things were
leading. Turning to the matter of the co-respondent's innocence or
guilt, the judge said he was faced with another problem, as he had to
ask himself if it were possible, a single, unattached man of Dr.
Carnarvon's age could have been so much in the company of so attractive
a woman as Lady Hylden without any feelings beyond those of mere
friendship being aroused. If so, the question was--with the many
opportunities he had had--had he kept those feelings under wise and
proper control? Was it probable he had?

Coming to the disappearance of Lady Hylden's maid, His Honor said, he
was not putting that in the scales as determining either innocence or
guilt, as it was impossible to say which side her evidence would have
favored. Certainly, placed in the witness-box, her evidence might have
gone far to prove the wife's guilt; on the other hand, however, might it
not have helped to establish her innocence? Without knowing which party
to the action--if, indeed, either party--were responsible for this
shameful attempt to impede the course of justice, he, the judge, would
have to ignore the incident altogether.

After speaking for upwards of an hour, he gave his judgment in one short
sentence, which exploded like a bomb in the court. "Viewing all the
circumstances, I am not satisfied the case for the petitioner has been
made out, and therefore do not grant the petition for the dissolution of
the marriage."

For a few seconds a stunned and amazed silence followed, and, then, an
almost audible sigh of relief rippled round. Sir Miles was seen to be
absolutely purple in his fury, while Dr. Carnarvon's face was white and
unsmiling.

That same evening the judge was about to sit down to dinner, when his
wife came in from answering the telephone. "It was Dr. Bentley," she
said. "He rang up to say Sir Miles had a stroke of apoplexy half an hour
ago, and passed away almost at once."

His Honor did not appear to be much interested. "Only what might have
been expected," he remarked. "He looked that type of man."

The daughter of the house, the judge's only child, came in. She was a
good-looking girl of 21, and the apple of her father's eye. "Oh, dad,"
she exclaimed with animation, "I've something which will interest you.
Jean Matthews and I were having lunch today at the Old Grotto cafe, and
at a table near us was such a handsome young officer in Merchant Navy
uniform. I did so admire him, and--" she laughed merrily,--"I think he
was interested in me, because he kept looking in our direction."

The judge was examining the pattern of the carpet, but he glanced up
affectionately at her. "And wasn't that quite natural?" he smiled.
"Aren't you worth looking at?"

"But that's not what I want to tell you," she went on. She spoke
impressively. "This boy, dad, was so much like you. He had your shaped
head, your eyes, and his hair was even wavy like yours. The likeness was
so striking."

"Then I must be a type," smiled the judge, and he turned the
conversation by asking her how she was getting on with her golf.



THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia
