
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Shearers & Some Sheds
Author: John Arthur Barry
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1304781.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: August 2013
Date most recently updated: August 2013

This eBook was produced by: Walter Moore

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: Shearers & Some Sheds
Author: John Arthur Barry


*


SHEARERS & SOME SHEDS
BY
J. A. BARRY.

Published in The Australian Town and Country Journal
Wednesday, August 29, 1906

*

Shearing throughout Australia will soon be in full swing, and already
in some districts early sheds are "cut out," and have relapsed into
their usual condition of dormant quiet, relieved only by an occasional
"drafting match," or a visit from a party of swagmen seeking shelter in
the deserted huts. But during next month, in the majority of sheds,
will still be heard the incessant whirr and drone of the machines as
the golden fleece is peeled off the animals' bodies by the sturdy
toilers, whose harvest, as well as that of the sheepowners, the present
season provides. With varying localities so does the work differ in its
essential features. In the more settled districts of the Eastern
Division, where the flocks are comparatively small, there is seldom or
never any trouble. Year by year the same procedure obtains; the work is
carried on without trouble; all things run smoothly. Often the same
sure hands appear on the board and take their old stands, remaining
until the last "cobbler" disappears and the bell sounds for the last
time. In such sheds there is generally a good understanding between
employer and employee. The former is personally acquainted with most of
his men; they are, indeed, often themselves small holders in the
neighbourhood. They know his price, the "cut" he requires, and they
strive to give the satisfaction that shall ensure another engagement.
This type of shearer is essentially a good one, reliable, steady, an
expert worker; a family man, as a rule, who has a home and interests in
the district. About him there is nothing flash or rowdy; there is no
gambling in the hut o' nights; no "flutters" with his "prads" on
Sundays. He wants his hard-earned money to improve his holding, to
purchase some fresh stock, to clothe and feed the "missus an' the
kids." Lucky the sheepgrower who can fill his board with shearers of
this class; he may depend on getting his wool off well and quickly and
to the accompaniment of none of those "rows" which so often mark the
progress of shearing in many sheds where owners are not so fortunate in
their men.

OUT BACK.

Further out the pastoralist has to take chances. The population is to a
large extent nomadic. To the great stations of the Far West muster all
sorts and conditions of the genus shearer and rouseabout, containing
elements that, given opportunity of the slightest, become boisterous
and unruly to a degree; in some instances even dangerous. So long as
things go smoothly, plenty of sheep, no wet weather, no lost time,
there is no friction. But, directly the men fancy they have a
grievance, then they begin to "make things lively," and at such periods
it takes a strong hand to keep then within bounds. Sailors are
proverbially accredited with being the greatest growlers in existence.
But they are not "in it" by comparison with the average western
shearer. He begins to growl and complain directly, to use his own
peculiar vocabulary, he "gets his kidneys lined," or, in other words,
feels the comforting effects of sound feeding, after, perhaps, a long
period of enforced abstinence. He growls at the sheep, their owner, the
man over the board at his food, and the man who cooks it; at the
machines, the engine that drives them, the shed itself, and all that it
contains. There is no pleasing this type of shearer; the only thing
satisfactory about him is that he works while he grumbles. And if he
does his work well then his ill-conditioned manner may be endured. But,
at times the greatest growler proves the most inefficient shearer, the
one who ruins his fleeces, and flays the sheep entrusted to him.
Nevertheless, it is quite on the cards that incompetent hand as he is,
he still is a ringleader and a favourite among his fellows. Sack him,
and the chances are that the whole crowd will, if not incontinently
knocking off work, still of set purpose shear so disgracefully as
necessitates their also being sent about their business. Or they will,
after their petty fashion, strive to annoy and irritate their employer
and his servants in every possible fashion that occurs to them. They
will swear the sheep are wet, although there may have been no rain for
months; dispute their tallies; sulk in their hut and pretend sickness;
and do all in their power to delay the carrying on of the work. Of late
years, however, and owing to the influence of the Australian Workers'
Union, the Pastoralists' Union, and that of the new body known as the
Machine Shearers' Union, matters have in most western sheds been
greatly improved by the introduction of a more respectable class than
the rowdy one which aforetime used to "boss the whole show" at shearing
time.

IN A SMART SHED.

The interior of a big shed, containing, say thirty stands on each side
of its spacious floor or sixty machines in all, is well worth a visit
There is, in fact, nothing like it to be seen elsewhere. The whole
scene is eloquent of the importance of the national industry, and of
the fashion in which its primary operations are carried on. Let us
suppose that a start is about to be made and that the moment for action
has arrived. The catching pens are stacked full of sheep; each shearer
stands by his machine; the classer and his assistant rollers and
skirters are at their tables; picking-up boys are dotted here and there
about the floor; the man in charge stands at his desk, all eyes fixed
upon him; an expectant hush reigns throughout the great building.
Suddenly, the overseer rings his bell, in signal to the engineer. At
the long blast of the latter's whistle, 60 men, with a simultaneous
rush, hurl themselves upon the pens, and emerge, each grasping a
struggling, kicking sheep. Machines are thrown into gear, and each bent
back in the long rows becomes instinct with strenuous exertion, as the
deft hands guide the whirring cutters around and about the animal's
body. Silence everywhere again, but for the incessant hum of the
machinery; the soft pit-pat of naked feet, as the boys rush around and
collect the fleeces, and bear them to the sorting tables. If the
shearers are a good, fast lot, it will be a pleasure to watch them at
work—their overseer's billet is a sinecure. Fleece after fleece will
come rolling off with the swiftness and exactitude born of long
experience; there will be no cuts, either in the staple itself, or on
the skin; as one peels a ripe orange, so will the sheep be denuded of
its coat without hurt or rough usage, until in a few minutes it slides
down the shoot into the outer pens naked, shivering, and amazed. So
rapidly are they shorn, so constant is the cry of "Sheep, oh!" to the
penner-up, that it appears almost impossible the pace should last. But
if the men are veterans fresh from other sheds, in prime form and
training, there will be no slacking off; they will run as fast and
surely as the machines, whose movements they control, and they will
turn out their hourly tallies at a rate varying from anything between
80 and 120 per hour. In such a shed as this the below 80 man has no
place. As time passes, and the bins at the rear of the classers' tables
begin to bulge with combing, clothing, and "pieces" of various grades,
the great press, sometimes a pair of presses, comes into action, worked
either by steam power or by sheer muscle and sinew. And presently in
the wool room row upon row of neat bales, all stencilled with signs
denoting the quality of their contents, the brand of station or owner's
initials, or both, and the number of the bale itself, begin to make
their appearance. In a shed manned after this fashion the overseer will
scarcely need to open his mouth; indeed, the less he has to say the
better for himself and his men. Up one side of the floor and down the
other he may march until the bell goes for "smoke oh," Then, while the
workers drink their hot tea and bolt big mouthfuls of "brownie," he
will find time to count out the pens of shorn sheep, entering each one
to the tally of the man who is dropping his sheep into it from the
floor above. Good men will run each other until they are almost
exhausted with the hard and incessant effort. And the faster an expert
shears, the better and cleaner his work generally is. But, as may be
imagined, the constant strain on every limb and sinew and muscle is
tremendous. Nor do bulk and strength always make for the largest
tallies. The lightweight, lithe, and wiry, rapid of movement, and sure
of hand and foot, not seldom "rings" the whole shed and tops every
score.

SHEDS OF SORTS.

There are, however, other kinds of sheds, where, from beginning to end
of the season, confusion and irritation are the keynotes to the whole
business. An owner, owing to some unforseen circumstances, only
succeeds in getting a scratch lot of shearers together, men who do not
care much whether they shear or not, so long as they are fed. The first
species are about getting licked into shape by the time the shed is cut
out; with the second, life is one continual squabble. Some men,
accustomed to hand shears, will fancy they can acquire the knowledge of
how to use the machines without any trouble. Once it so happened that
the whole outfit consisted of hand-shearers, who, because there were no
others procurable, were sent to work the machines. A minute after the
whistle blew to start, the board presented an extraordinary spectacle
of men, sheep, and machines all intermixed, and rolling about in every
direction. Disentangled at last, they were given another show, but to
even worse purpose; and in the long run recourse was forced to be had
to the shears. With these the men proved themselves expert enough. But
each one of them had previously averred that he could use a machine to
perfection.

In the smaller sheds of "out back," affairs may be generalised as
"higgledy-piggledy. Unlike their contemporaries of "inside," the owners
have to take what they can get, and be thankful. The man who is out for
a "big cut" passes them by despitefully; the rouseabout even gives them
a wide berth, so long as he can get anything better. Thus, before now,
it has happened that an unfortunate small holder in the more remote
districts has had to practically shear his own sheep with what help his
family could afford him. And, perhaps, in the end, it has been to his
advantage to do so; for the lordly operator of a run of big sheds, with
several fat cheques in his pocket, even if prevailed upon to stay his
township-bound footsteps, would probably treat the "cocky's' sheep with
scant ceremony, nor employ any artistic skill in "taking their jackets
off." Not so many years ago the small sheep farmer "inside" was also
forced to employ any sort of shearer he could manage to get hold of.
Now things have materially changed with him. He shears no longer on
tarpaulins spread under a roof made of bark. No longer does he dig a
hole in the ground and pack his fleeces into it with a spade. Sheds of
the best, if small; presses of the latest construction; and not seldom
three or four machines of the most approved pattern all witness the
advance made by the "man on the land" in the successful working of his
chosen industry. Some day perhaps, as steam has superseded the old
"tongs," so will electricity supersede steam in the woolsheds of
Australia. But no matter what developments may happen in the motive
power that drives the combs and cutters through the fleece, it is
pretty certain that the skill and control of the shearers' hand will
always be found necessary.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia