
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Adventuress
Author: Arthur Gask
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 2000971.txt
Language: English
Date first posted:  September 2020
Date last updated:  September 2020

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Production Notes:

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------


The Adventuress


By Arthur Gask


Published in the Chronicle (Adelaide, SA : 1895 1954), Thursday 30
October 1941.



The baby had been hushed to sleep, and, with one last lingering look
of adoration, the young mother moved very softly over to her desk and
sat down to write. She was very pretty, so young, it seemed, to have
maternal cares, but as she looked round at the luxuriously appointed
room she gave a sigh of deep contentment. Fortune, she knew, had indeed
been kind to her! She had everything she could want!

She picked up her pen and continued her interrupted letter. "No, Nancy
dear," she wrote, "I never forget I have a cousin in far-off England,
although I have not seen her for fifteen years. You left Australia just
after mother died, and I was only seven then.

"Yesterday was the first anniversary of our wedding, and I am so happy.
Of course everyone said I had made a great catch, but it was a real
love-match, and I would have married John if he hadn't had a penny.
You will have heard I was working in a café before I was married to
him, but that makes no difference to what he thinks of me, and we are
devoted to each other.

"Yes, it was a real romance, and I'll tell you all about it from the
very beginning when it started, less than eighteen months ago. When
poor father died at the beginning of last year we two girls were left
almost penniless, and we came up to the city at once to find some way
of earning our own living. Hilda got a situation with a kindly old
lawyer, but I had no luck at all. Trade happened to be very bad at the
time, and the shops wouldn't engage an inexperienced hand when plenty
of experienced ones were available. In the offices it was the same.
Being nearly twenty-one, I was too old to start as a learner, and the
registry offices could supply properly trained clerks to anyone who
wanted them.

"One morning, when almost in desperation because funds were getting so
low, I saw an advertisement in one of the newspapers for a waitress in
a café, and I went after the situation at once. I hated the idea of
being a waitress, but what could I do?

"Arriving at the café I found there were a lot of girls waiting to be
interviewed, and thought dismally I should have very little chance.
However, directly my turn came and I was taken into the proprietress,
a Mrs. Lewis, I felt much more hopeful. She had a very kind face, and
was undoubtedly a lady. She eyed me critically, and at once started to
ask me all sorts of questions about myself, very quickly and without
wasting a moment of time. Finally, she said smilingly, 'Well, although
you've had no experience, I'll give you a trial. You're pretty, and
that counts a lot. Besides, the work can easily be picked up by anyone
of ordinary intelligence.' 'But what are the wages?' I asked timidly.
'One pound a week,' she replied, and then, seeing my face fall, as
well it might, considering I was paying 22/6 at the boarding house,
she added quickly, 'But then, you ought to make as much again or that
in tips. My customers are all of a good class, professional men and
heads of business houses, and they are most of them quite generous. The
charges here are high to keep the place select.' She spoke warningly.
'But you take care of yourself and keep everybody at a distance. There
are always plenty of pitfalls in a city for pretty girls.'

"There were four other waitresses, and they soon put me in the way
of things. I felt very nervous at first, but in a few days flattered
myself I was as quick and competent as anyone. Most of our customers
were elderly, but there was a fair sprinkling of younger men. They
all seemed well-to-do and, to my great delight, the first week I made
over 35/ in tips. It wasn't a nice feeling, taking the sixpences and
threepences at first, but I soon got over it and regarded it as quite
the natural thing. A number of those I served, both young and elderly,
were often inclined to be friendly, but I treated them all the same and
never encouraged any conversation when it began to get personal.

"Mrs. Lewis had the eyes of a hawk, and always seemed to know what was
going on. 'That's right, my dear,' she said to me one day, 'never make
yourself too cheap and they'll think the more of you.'

"I had been there about a month when one morning John came in, and
I thought at once that I had met my fate. He looked so handsome and
carried himself so boldly and confidently that I was interested in him
at once. His eyes roved round the room and then, to my great delight,
he came and sat down at one of my tables. 'Hullo,' he exclaimed
smilingly, 'and so you're the new star they've got here. I've heard
about you and that they call you the duchess.'

"But I only just smiled back and, having brought what he had ordered,
moved away. Then I was thrilled to notice that several times he was
looking in my direction. When he left he gave me a smiling nod, and I
found he had put sixpence under the plate for me.

"Oh, Nancy, that sixpence made me feel so miserable! It woke me with a
horrible thunderclap from my beautiful day dream of meeting my Prince
Charming while working in that café, for then, for the first time, I
realised the great gulf which must always stretch between me and those
to whom I was carrying what they had ordered to eat and drink. What a
little fool I had been all along, for how could I have ever thought
that any man would want to pick for his wife a girl who had been taking
threepences and sixpences from everyone who offered them!

"I felt miserably unhappy for the rest of that day, but that night,
when I was undressing, all my pride and courage suddenly came back and
I felt quite hopeful once again. At any rate, I told myself I would be
no easy conquest for anyone and, if I fell in love with this boy and he
with me, it would be through the marriage vows alone that I would go to
him.

"The next morning John appeared in the café again and my foolish heart
started to go pit-a-pat immediately. As I had been sure he would, he
came straight to my tables, and smiled as charmingly at me as he had
done the day before. But I had got myself well in hand and waited upon
him demurely, giving him no idea of how interested I was in him. By
then I had learnt from the other girls that he was John McCairne, the
only son of old Hugh McCairne, who was very wealthy and owned one of
the largest sheep stations in Australia.

"Then John took to coming regularly to the Rialto whenever, as he
explained, he was down in the city. 'Mind your steps, young woman,'
nodded Mrs. Lewis, who was taking in everything. 'That man likes pretty
girls, but he's only a flirt. Lots of society mothers have tried to
get him for their daughters, but they've all failed. Besides, he's not
likely to mean anything serious with you, even if he were a marrying
man.' I only smiled, but when one day he asked me to come out for the
evening, with the plan I had mapped out, I shook my head. 'But why
not?' he asked with a frown. 'You say you've got no boy friend, so
where'll be the harm?' "

"'I don't know you well enough,' I laughed. 'I'm not a prude, but I
don't go out with everyone.'

"He looked annoyed and then didn't come near the Rialto for a whole
week, although I had heard he was in the city. Then, when he did resume
his visits, he renewed his invitation every time. At last I agreed, and
it was arranged he should take me to the pictures.

"It was a thrilling moment for me when I met him outside the Theatre
Royal, for it was the first time he had seen me when not in my
waitress's uniform. But, hoping for such an occasion, I had been
preparing for it for a long time, and, indeed, had spent down to my
last pound to have every thing ready.

"Never mind what I wore, but it was all good, and Hilda, who saw me
off, was positive I looked as well-dressed as any girl in the city
could want to be. John told me afterwards that he drew in a deep breath
when he caught sight of me, but all he said then was, 'My word, but you
do look nice! Why, you're a real little beauty!'

"He was very nice and polite all the evening, and not a bit forward,
and I enjoyed everything immensely. He drove me home in his car, which
I did not altogether like, because our boarding-house looked so shabby.
When we said good-bye we just shook hands, but he squeezed mine ever so
slightly.

"Then commenced a most happy time for me. Whenever he was down in the
city he used to take me out twice and even three times during the week.
He had kissed me now, and I had kissed him back, but I took care the
kisses should be always short ones and allowed no lingering over them.

"One night, when we were together in his car upon one of the beaches
he kissed me, and then suddenly put his arm round my waist and made to
pull me tightly to him. But I disengaged myself instantly, and said
very sharply, 'No, John, I won't have it, and if you try that again I
won't come out with you any more.'

"'Why not?' he asked in an equally as sharp a tone as I had used, and I
could see that he was inclined to be really angry.

"'Because I don't think people should embrace unless things are serious
between them,' I replied warmly.

"'Ho, ho, then you are not serious with me!' he exclaimed, and there
was just a trace of sarcasm in his tones.

"I shook my head. 'Not yet,' I laughed teasingly. 'I'm trying you out,
and I'm not quite certain about you.' I nodded. 'There are several
things about you which don't please me. For one thing, you have too
many whiskies and sodas for a man of your age. They are not good for
you.'

"He reddened furiously, and stared in astonishment. Then a long silence
followed, and it was quite five minutes before either of us spoke
again. Then he said smilingly, 'Well, you're either a very wise young
woman or else a very cold one. I can't quite make out which.'

"'I'm neither,' I smiled back. I became serious. 'I'm just a girl who
intends to go to her real lover as God made her, and not with any
secrets she'll be always having to hide.'

"'Hum,' he remarked thoughtfully, 'you're dangerous, and I see I shall
have to be very careful.' But for all that, his goodnight kiss would
have been warmer if I had let it be.

"Then things began to move quickly towards a climax. One afternoon
about 3 o'clock and during the slack time when there were few people
in the café, a tall, erect man midway between sixty and seventy, I
thought, came in and, after a good look round, walked over and sat
down at a table near where I was standing. His distinguished, handsome
face seemed somehow familiar to me. He regarded me curiously as he
asked curtly for coffee and toast and, when I had served him and was
attending to other customers, I saw his eyes were following me round.
Presently, when at his request I made out his docket, he handed me
a one pound note, and then when I returned him his 19 shillings in
change, he pushed a two-shilling piece towards me over the table. 'Too
much,' I smiled, laying down a shilling and sixpence.

"'Oh, that's it, is it?' he said with his face puckered up into a
frown. He spoke scornfully, 'To kind of let me know, I suppose, that
the two shillings wouldn't get me any forwarder, and that you preferred
younger men.' Then, before I could take in what he meant, he went on
very sharply, 'Here, young woman, my name's Hugh McCairne, and I want
to know what you think is going to be the end of your going about with
my boy.'

"My breath caught in my throat. Now, I realised why his face had seemed
familiar. Of course, he was John's father! I could feel myself getting
hot all over.

"He went on quickly, raising his voice, 'Yes, you may well blush, but
it's about time you thought where things were leading you. With any
sense, you must see----'

"'Hush, hush,' I exclaimed sharply, because some of the other customers
were beginning to look round in our direction, 'this is not the place
to discuss it!' I spoke with some indignation, 'Please, remember I have
my living to get here, and you are attracting attention. If you want to
speak to me it can be done somewhere else.'

"He calmed down at once. 'Well, will you meet me tonight at my hotel,
the Semiris, at 7 o'clock?' he asked curtly. I hesitated, but I had got
all my wits about me now, and was perfectly cool and collected. 'And I
suppose that means you are asking me to dinner,' I said thoughtfully.

"He raised his eyebrows as if rather surprised and smiled coldly. 'All
right,' he nodded. 'I'll give you something to eat. Then it's to be 7
o'clock and don't you be late, as I hate unpunctuality.'

"Now Nancy, my dear old father-in-law will have it that everything I
did that night was done of deliberate purpose to entrap him. But if he
is right, I only wanted to make him realise that, if ever John did ask
me, I was quite nice enough to be his wife. The Semiris, of course, you
remember, is about the most fashionable hotel in town, and I learnt
afterwards that Mr. McCairne had never intended for one moment to take
me to dinner there. Instead, he had meant to go to some quiet little
place where it was not likely he would be recognised in my company. So
when I arrived at the Semiris, he was waiting outside, all ready to
whisk me away quickly before anybody had noticed our meeting.

"But when he saw me very nicely dressed and quite presentable--he
didn't recognise me at first--after a moment's hesitation he changed
his mind and with a grim and purposeful face took me into the big
dining hall of the hotel.

"He did not seem too pleased, however, when we were given a table
in the very centre of the room, but the place was crowded and that
happened to be the only table available. When we were seated, he looked
round frowningly and nodded to some men he knew, but in a few moments
he turned back to me and his face broke into a rather reluctant smile.
'Gad, you're good-looking all right, Miss Trevor!' he exclaimed. 'I'll
admit that. You're by far the prettiest girl here, and are making quite
a lot of interest.' He chuckled, 'There are two friends of mine close
near, all eyes and ears for what's going on, and won't they just have
a tale to tell about me!' He made a grimace. 'I hope to goodness I get
home before they do, to explain everything to my wife.'

"Then, all suddenly, his manner became most friendly. 'Now will you
have a cocktail?' he asked. 'Oh, you won't! You want to keep your
complexion, do you? Well, it's certainly worth keeping! But what would
you like to drink? What, claret! Why, I quite thought you'd choose
champagne!' He frowned. 'Has my son ever given you champagne?'

"'He's offered it, but I've refused,' I smiled. I had determined upon
my line of action and spoke boldly. 'That's one thing I've talked to
John about,' I went on. 'He has far too many nice things to drink.
Never, of course, more than he can take easily, but more than are good
for a boy of his age.'

"Mr. McCairne fairly gasped. 'But you've got a nerve, haven't you,' he
exclaimed, 'talking as if you had some proprietary interest in my son?'
He glared at me. 'What are your intentions, young woman?' He could
hardly get his breath. 'Do you think he's going to marry you?'

"I interested myself in my fish for quite a minute before replying.
Then I said rather hesitatingly, 'I don't quite know, Mr. McCairne.
We've neither of us made up our minds yet.' I laughed. 'I'm not quite
certain I should accept him, even if he proposed.'

"Mr. McCairne gulped down his astonishment and pretended to be very
amused. 'And you a waitress in a café,' he exclaimed, 'in part
depending upon your livelihood upon tips!'

"'That's nothing,' I said coolly. 'You were only a station hand once,
probably earning far less than I am. Why are you proud of telling
people how you have worked your way up!'

"He bowed ironically. 'A hit, Miss Trevor, a good hit!' he exclaimed.
He nodded frowningly. 'Yes, you're a clever young woman, and I see my
boy will have to look out!'

"'But why should he have to look out?' I asked warmly. 'Why should it
be wrong if he wanted me to be his wife? You say I'm quite presentable!
Well, I'm educated and I come of good stock. My father was a doctor.' I
spoke with some sharpness. 'What do you find wrong about me?' He made
no answer, and, the waiter coming to change our plates, quite a long
silence ensued. 'Well,' I asked at last, 'can't you think of anything
wrong?'

"I saw I had driven him into a corner, and he smiled and shook his
head. 'Not for the moment,' he replied. He sighed. 'But come, let's
talk about something else.'

"So we started upon quite an interesting conversation, chiefly
about ourselves. He told me about his early struggles and how he
had gradually made his way, and I told him of my life as a doctor's
daughter in a small bush town and, humorously, of my adventures when
looking for a situation in the city. The conversation was continued
after dinner in the lounge, and ten o'clock came before either of us
had realised how quickly the time had flown. Then I said I must be
going home. Mr. McCairne made a grimace.

"'Look here, my dear,' he said, 'you've hypnotised me, and I really
don't know what to say about you and John.' He smiled with mock
resignation. 'I think you'd better come and spend a weekend with us at
Riverdale. Then we'll see what John's mother thinks about you. Now,
would you like to come?'

"My legs went all wobbly, but I pulled myself together and said I'd
like to, very much. 'But I think you might very nicely ask my sister
as well,' I went on. 'Then it won't look so obvious that I am being
brought down for inspection.'

"'A good idea!' he exclaimed. The grim look returned to his face. 'And
then we'll be able to see what the other member of the family is like.
Riverdale is only just over a hundred miles from the city, and John can
bring you both down.'

"'But one thing, please, Mr. McCairne,' I said. 'I'd like you to invite
me openly in front of John. He'll be up in the city tomorrow, won't he?
Well, he'll most likely come to the Rialto about eleven. So you appear
a few minutes after.

"'You little schemer!' he exclaimed with mock severity. 'You'll be
trying to run the whole family soon.' He nodded, 'Still, I'll do as you
suggest.' Then he added as an afterthought, 'but I don't think we'd
better say anything to John, at any rate, for the present, about our
having met here tonight. I'll tell him myself later on.'

"The next morning John came into the Rialto rather later than I
expected, and we had had only just time to say a few words when Mr.
McCairne appeared and came straight up to us.

"'Ha, ha, my boy,' he exclaimed, shaking a finger reprovingly. 'I've
found out at last what has been bringing you down so often to the city!
No, no, you needn't introduce us. I came in yesterday and had a little
chat with this young lady.'

"John's face was a study, and for the moment he seemed downright
annoyed, but then his easy smile came back, and, thinking I must be
brightened,?? he nodded reassuringly to me. 'It's all right, Helen,' he
said, 'my father's a dear old fellow, and you needn't be in the least
bit afraid of him.'

"'Afraid of me!' laughed the old man, as if it were a good joke. 'Why,
the boot's on the other foot. I'm the one to be afraid of a girl with
eyes like hers.'

"I left them together and did not return to their table until they were
getting up to leave. Then, in saying good-bye, Mr. McCairne gave me the
invitation for the following Friday.

"Oh, Nancy, that weekend was such a triumph for me! John's mother took
to me at once, and treated me as if I were a most honored guest. She
was a sweet old lady and not a bit stuck-up. John was very quiet and
didn't say much, but I could see he was proud of me, and very pleased
with the way things were going. Strangely enough, although we were left
a lot together that weekend our love-making was very restrained, on my
part because I had no intention of letting John think I took anything
for granted, and upon his, because, as he told me afterwards, he never
liked things to be arranged for him, and he thought his parents were
doing it then.

"On the Sunday night, just before we got ready to go back to the city,
Mr. McCairne drew me to one side. 'Look here, little woman,' he said,
'both the wife and I are very happy about everything, and would like to
see you and John come to an understanding. But you must first get to
thoroughly know your own minds, and so what I suggest is this. Hand in
your notice to the Rialto at once, and then come here as my secretary
and companion to my wife. I'll give you £100 a year, and if you and my
boy don't finally hit it off'-- he shook his finger at me--'then, you
little adventuress, I'll look out for a husband for you somewhere else.
Yes, you can kiss me if you like, but I'm sure it won't be one like
those you give John.' You can imagine how thrilled I was.

"I went to them a fortnight afterwards, and things could not have been
happier for me. John was most attentive and made very few trips to
the city, and then only when he was absolutely obliged to go. I was
more in love with him than ever, and we seemed to be drifting into a
matter-of-course engagement.

"But suddenly a dreadful thing happened, and if I hadn't acted as the
bold little adventuress they all laughingly pretended me to be. I might
have lost John altogether.

"All at once John became cold towards me. He didn't want to kiss me any
more, and, as much as possible, avoided being alone with me. He took to
stopping up in the city, too, for two and even three days at a time,
and altogether it was quite plain to everybody that he was intending to
drop me.

"His father and mother were most upset, but they said nothing to me,
and, of course, I was much too proud to refer to it. I felt terribly
hurt, but tried not to let anyone see it, and, outwardly, was just as
smiling and bright as before.

"Then one night at dinner John suddenly announced he was going for a
trip to Colombo and sailing the following week. He explained he wanted
a change, and was sure the voyage would do him good.

"Mr. and Mrs. McCairne looked dumbfounded and didn't say a word, but
I made myself appear to be most interested and asked him all sorts
of questions about the voyage and what the boat he was going in was
like. I was as happy about it as if I were going myself. After dinner,
however, when without a word he left the room, I followed him. 'Here,
John,' I said firmly, 'I want to speak to you. Come out into the
garden.'

He frowned and hesitated, but my manner was insistent and he came after
me. I led him into the summer house just across the lawn. My heart was
beating like a sledge hammer, but I held myself well in hand.

"'Sit down,' I said, and seating myself down, too, but well away from
him, I went on sharply, 'Now, I want an explanation, please, and it's
not only myself I'm thinking of but of your father and mother as well.
You must see how you're upsetting them.' I spoke disdainfully. 'What
does it all mean?'

"'What does what all mean?' he echoed, making out he was surprised at
my question.

"'Oh, don't pretend you don't know,' I retorted angrily. 'Something's
turned you against me and it's a week since you've offered to kiss me.
You avoid me, too, as if I were something hateful. What's happened?'

"He regarded me very coldly. 'I don't like girls,' he said slowly, and
holding my eyes with his, 'who make out they're so straight and proper
and then, when it suits them, carry on in a way which suggests the
exact opposite.'

"'Meaning me?' I asked incredulously.

"'Who else?' he scoffed. Then he rapped out fiercely, 'Who was that old
man you were seen sitting with in the lounge of the Semiris Hotel, one
night, late, a little while before you came up here?'

"I gasped and, so overwhelming was my relief, I could not speak.
Instead, I threw back my head and burst into nervous but rippling
laughter. 'Oh, you foolish boy,' I cried, 'and so it's that which
has been making you behave all this time like a sulky child?' I was
trembling all over and could not keep my voice from shaking. 'Why,
hasn't your dad ever told you? It was he who took me to the Semiris
that night and----' but I broke down and burst into tears.

"John had his arms round me in two seconds. 'No, no, you shall never
kiss me again,' I cried furiously. 'You've doubted me and----'

"But with his face pressed so close to mine I could not get out another
word. I just closed my eyes and the next few minutes were among the
very happiest in all my life.

"And you just understand, you little witch, that I'll be kissing you
now for keeps,' he said masterfully, when at last he let me free to
smooth down my dishevelled hair. He pulled me to him again and his
voice dropped tenderly. 'Oh, I'm so ashamed of myself. I'll never doubt
you again.'

"Presently we went back into the house and his father's face broke into
a delighted smile as he saw us walking so close together, with John
holding tightly to my hand.

"'But what's happened?' gasped his mother, with her eyes opened very
wide.

"'Oh, nothing much,' laughed John. He bent down and kissed me
shamelessly in front of them. 'Only that this young woman here has just
asked me to be her husband and, to save argument, I've consented.'

"'Oh, you story-teller!' I protested vehemently. 'I did nothing of the
kind,' but both his parents pretended not to believe me.

"Six weeks later we were married, and I know I had the very loveliest
honeymoon any girl could have ever had. But I must finish now, for I
hear John's car in the drive and want to seal this letter up, so that
he cannot suggest he should read what I've been writing about. He'd
only laugh and say it was at last the frank confession of his little
adventuress. So, with heaps of love until I write again,

Your affectionate cousin,

"Helen McCairne."



THE END.

Project Gutenberg Australia
