
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Russian Retrospect
Author: Arthur Gask
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 2001041.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: September 2020
Date last updated: September 2020

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Production Notes:

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

RUSSIAN RETROSPECT



by ARTHUR GASK


Published in The Mail, Adelaide, S.A. Saturday 29 January, 1944.


=================================

When this fell tide of blood and agony has ebbed, when this scourge of
horrors unbelievable no longer lashes on the quivering shoulders of
mankind, and when the veil of secrecy and mystery and lies is at last
lifted, surely the historian will record that, above all happenings of
these dreadful years, it was that one of the 22nd day in June, 1941,
which saved the world, for it was then that the great German Colossus
laid his body open to a mortal blow.

==================================



DESPAIR



I SO well remember that Sunday afternoon when it came over the air that
Germany was attacking Russia. I was living then in what city dwellers
would call a very lonely place, high up by the range of hills dominated
by the Camel's Hump.

It had been a most depressing day, and now dusk was drawing in under
a dark and lowering sky. Fierce rainsqualls were beating down, the
glistening mud, and the cold was as biting as it can be in mid-winter
in South Australia, nearly 3,000 ft. above sea level.

I had been writing at my desk, but my thoughts now wandered to the war,
where things were looking every bit as bleak for us as was the outlook
from my window. Everything seemed to be going badly.

The bitter humiliation of our so recent evacuation from Crete was still
rankling, but, far worse than any loss of prestige, with the island
in enemy hands our whole position in the Eastern Mediterranean was
threatened, with Libya, Suez, Syria, and all that lay beyond in more
than possible danger.

Rommel had just thrown us back at Sollum, and the high hopes held out
to us of our attack there had come to nothing. Vichy had just made what
"The Times" described as a "diabolical pact" with Germany.

The Turco-German pact, to which the same newspaper referred to as "bad
business," had just been signed. The U-boat campaign was going against
us, and day by day we were being warned that our shipping losses were
very grave.

Indeed, only that week Hore-Belisha, the former Minister for War, had
summed up the whole situation in the House of Commons in one biting
sentence when he declared we were suffering defeat after defeat in both
war and diplomacy.



DOUBT



REGARDING Russia, Hitler was exerting a deadly pressure on her. He was
demanding grain, minerals, and oil, and she would have to give them to
him or be annihilated. It was agreed by all competent observers she was
in no condition to fight, and also that Stalin would never dare to arm
his peasantry, certain that with weapons in their hands they would turn
against him.

This, then, was the world position when that Sunday afternoon,
depressed and thinking any fresh news would be bad news, I switched
on the wireless, and upon my horrified ears fell the words:--"German
forces have crossed the frontier and invaded Russia."

Then came Hitler's message to his people. "Weighed down with heavy care
for many months, I can at last speak . . . . a German concentration,
the greatest the world has ever known, has been completed . . . . our
soldiers are now advancing from East Prussia to the Carpathians . . . I
have decided to put the fate and future of the German Reich into their
hands, and may God help us in the battle."

Followed a warning to the Russian people from the Berlin Radio:--"It is
useless to resist . . . . you are facing the best Army in the world,
which, in a few weeks, annihilated the strongest armies in Europe."

I was in the very depths of depression. So, it had really come! Hitler
would add Russia to the other conquered nations! He would get his
grain, his minerals, and his oil! Then, satiated with Soviet blood and
spoil, he would turn as a giant refreshed, upon our sceptred isle,
"This precious stone set in the silver sea."

I switched off the wireless, not thrilled, as I realise now I should
have been, in one of the most joyful moments of my life, for, had I
only known it, the announcement which had just come through was the
most wonderful piece of good news for many a long, long day. I had
thought it was the death-knell of a nation I had heard, whereas it had
been the joybells for a nation born again.

Who, however, on that dreary Sunday afternoon, in their wildest flights
of imagination would have ever dared to think that more than two and
a half years later, Leningrad would not have been taken, Moscow would
not have fallen, and the Red Army would be fighting near to the Polish
border?



HOPE



NOW come two dreadful thoughts. Where would we be today if none of
these things had happened, or where either, if instead of using it in
Russia, Hitler had sent even one-quarter of that mighty Army over to
North Africa?

Do we dare to think? Remembering by what an uncomfortably narrow margin
the tide was finally turned against Rommel and his hosts, can we
conceive there would have been any El Alamein victory, any triumph in
Tunisia, or any of the successes which followed after? Indeed, would
not Libya, Egypt, Suez, Iran, Iraq, and even more have been lost to us,
and could we have ever won them back?

Then we must realise, too, that if Hitler had left Russia alone and,
after over-running North Africa, had concentrated all his energies
nearer home upon the construction of fighting planes, bombers, and
U-boats, particularly upon the last when we were then so ill-prepared
to meet the menace, things would have been very different today.

If we were still unconquered, the question we would be asking ourselves
now would not be can we beat Germany, but--can we save ourselves from
complete and utter annihilation.

So in those last moments of Schicklgruber's black and evil life, when
he kneels waiting for the axe to fall, or he stands waiting for the
noose to jerk upon his neck, or, more likely still, when he feels the
cold barrel of his own revolver pressed against his forehead, surely
his last thought will be that it was on that fatal day in June, 1941,
he made the wrong move and--lost the game.


THE END.



Project Gutenberg Australia
