

Project Gutenberg Australia



A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title:      The Jerilderie Letter [Dictated to Joe Byrne in 1879]
Author:     Edward (Ned) Kelly (1854-1880)
eBook No.:  0400761.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          October 2004
Date most recently updated: October 2004

This eBook was produced by: Chris Gray

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Jerilderie Letter [Dictated to Joe Byrne in 1879]
Author:     Edward (Ned) Kelly (1854-1880)





Dear Sir,

I wish to acquaint you with some of the occurrences of the present past
and future. In or about the spring of 1870 the ground was very soft a
hawker named Mr Gould got his waggon bogged between Greta and my mother's
house on the eleven mile creek, the ground was that rotten it would bog a
duck in places so Mr. Gould had abandon his waggon for fear of loosing
his horses in the spewy ground. he was stopping at my Mother's awaiting
finer or dryer weather Mr. McCormack and his wife. hawkers also were
camped in Greta the mosquitoes were very bad which they generally are in
a wet spring and to help them Mr. Johns had a horse called Ruita Cruta
although a gelding was as clever as old Wombat or any other Stallion at
running horses away and taking them on his beat which was from Greta
swamp to the seven mile creek consequently he enticed McCormack's horse
away from Greta.

Mr. Gould was up early feeding his horses heard a bell and seen McCormack
horses for he knew the horse well he sent his boy to take him back to
Greta. When McCormack's got the horse they came straight out to Goold and
accused him of working the horse; this was false, and Goold was amazed at
the idea I could not help laughing to hear Mrs. McCormack accusing him of
using the horse after him being so kind as to send his boy to take him
from the Ruta Cruta and take him back to them.

I pleaded Goulds innocence and Mrs McCormack turned on me and accused me
of bringing the horse from Greta to Goolds waggon to pull him out of the
bog I did not say much to the woman as my Mother was present but that
same day me and my uncle was cutting calves Gould wrapped up a note and a
pair of the calves testicles and gave them to me to give them to Mrs
McCormack. I did not see her and I gave the parcel to a boy to give to
her when she would come instead of giving it to her he gave it to her
husband consequently McCormack said he would summons me I told him
neither me or Gould used their horse.

he said I was a liar & he could welt me or any of my breed I was about 14
years of age but accepted the challenge and dismounting when Mrs
McCormack struck my horse in the flank with a bullock's skin it jumped
forward and my fist came in collision with McCormack's nose and caused
him to loose his equillibrium and fall postrate I tied up my horse to
finish the battle but McCormack got up and ran to the Police camp.
Constable Hall asked me what the row was about I told him they accused me
and Gould of using their horse and I hit him and I would do the same to
him if he challenged me McCormack pulled me and swore their lies against
me I was sentenced to three months for hitting him and three months for
the parcel and bound to keep the peace for 12 months.

Mrs McCormack gave good substantial evidence as she is well acquainted
with that place called Tasmania better known as the Dervon or Vandiemans
land and McCormack being a Police man over the convicts and women being
scarce released her from that land of bondage and tyranny, and they came
to Victoria and are at present residents of Greta and on the 29th of
March I was released from prison and came home Wild Wright came to the
Eleven Mile to see Mr Gunn stopped all night and lost his mare both him
and me looked all day for her and could not get her Wright who was a
stranger to me was in a hurry to get back to Mansfield and I gave him
another mare and he told me if I found his mare to keep her until he
brought mine back I was going to Wangaratta and seen the mare and I
caught her and took her with me all the Police and Detective Berrill seen
her as Martains girls used to ride her about the town during several days
that I stopped at Petre Martains Star Hotel in Wangaratta.

She was a chestnut mare white face docked tail very remarkable branded
(M) as plain as the hands on a town clock. the property of a Telegraph
Master in Mansfield he lost her on the 6th gazetted her on the 12th of
March and I was a prisoner in Beechworth Gaol until the 29 of March
therefore I could not have Stole the mare. I was riding the mare through
Greta Constable Hall came to me and said he wanted me to sign some papers
that I did not sign at Beechworth concerning my bail bonds I thought it
was the truth he said the papers was at the Barracks and I had no idea he
wanted to arrest me or I would have quietly rode away instead of going to
the Barracks.

I was getting off when Hall caught hold of me and thought to throw me but
made a mistake and came on the broad of his back himself in the dust the
mare galloped away and instead of me putting my foot on Halls neck and
taking his revolver and putting him in the lock up. I tried to catch the
mare. Hall got up and snapped three or four caps at me and would have
shot me but the colts patent refused. This is well known in Greta Hall
never told me he wanted to arrest me until after he tried to shoot me
when I heard the caps snapping I stood until Hall came close he had me
covered and was shaking with fear and I knew he would pull the trigger
before he would be game to put his hand on me so I duped, and jumped at
him caught the revolver with one hand and Hall by the collar with the
other.

I dare not strike him or my sureties would loose the bond money I used to
trip him and let him take a mouth ful of dust now and again as he was as
helpless as a big guano after leaving a dead bullock or a horse. I kept
throwing him in the dust until I got him across the street the very spot
where Mrs O'Briens Hotel stands now the cellar was just dug then there
was some brush fencing where the post and rail was taking down and on
this I threw big cowardly Hall on his belly I straddled him and rooted
both spurs onto his thighs he roared like a big calf attacked by dogs and
shifted several yards of the fence I got his hands at the back of his
neck and trid to make him let the revolver go but he stuck to it like
grim death to a dead volunteer he called for assistance to a man named
Cohen and Barnett, Lewis, Thompson, Jewitt two blacksmiths who was
looking on I dare not strike any of there as I was bound to keep the
peace or I could have spread those curs like dung in a paddock they got
ropes tied my hands and feet and Hall beat me over the head with his six
chambered colts revolver nine stitches were put in some of the cuts by Dr
Hastings And when Wild Wright and my mother came they could trace us
across the street by the blood in the dust and which spoiled the lustre
of the paint on the gate-post of the Barracks Hall sent for more Police
and Doctor Hastings.

Next morning I was handcuffed a rope tied from them to my legs and to the
seat of the cart and taken to Wangaratta Hall was frightened I would
throw him out of the cart so he tied me whilst Constable Arthur laughed
at his cowardice for it was he who escorted me and Hall to Wangaratta. I
was tried and committed as Hall swore I claimed the mare the Doctor died
or he would have proved Hall a perjurer Hall has been tried several times
for perjury but got clear as this is no crime in the Police force it is a
credit to a Policeman to convict an innocent man but any muff can pot a
guilty one Halls character is well known about El Dorado and Snowy Creek
and Hall was considerably in debt to Mr L.O. Brien and he was going to
leave Greta Mr O. Brien seen no other chance of getting his money so
there was a subscription collected for Hall and with the aid of this
money he got James Murdock who was recently hung in Wagga Wagga to give
false evidence against me but I was acquitted on the charge of
horsestealing and on Halls and Murdocks evidence I was found guilty of
receiving and got 3 years experience in Beechworth Pentridges dungeons.

this is the only charge ever proved against me Therefore I can say I
never was convicted of horse or cattle stealing My Brother Dan was never
charged with assaulting a woman but he was sentenced to three months
without the option of a fine and one month and two pounds fine for
damaging property by Mr. Butler P.M. a sentence that there is no law to
uphold therefore the Minister of Justice neglected his duty in that case,
but there never was such a thing as Justice in the English laws but any
amount of injustice to be had. Out of over thirty head of the very best
horses the land could produce I could only find one when I got my
liberty. Constable Flood stole and sold the most of them to the navvies
on the railway line one bay cob he stole and sold four different times
the line was completed and the men all gone when I came out and Flood was
shifted to Oxley. he carried on the same game there all the stray horses
that was any time without an owner and not in the Police Gazette Flood
used to claim He was doing a good trade at Oxley until Mr Brown of the
Laceby Station got him shifted as he was always running his horses about.

Flood is different to Sergeant Steel, Strachan, Hall and the most of
Police a they have got to hire cads and if they fail the Police are quite
helpless. But Flood can make a cheque single-handed he is the greatest
horsestealer with the exception of myself and George King I know of. I
never worked on a farm a horse and saddle was never traced to me after
leaving employment since February 1873 I worked as a faller at Mr J.
Saunders and R Rules sawmills then for Heach and Dockendorf I never
worked for less than two pound ten a week since I left Pentridge and in
1875 or 1876 I was overseer for Saunders and Rule.

Bourke's water--holes sawmills in Victoria since then I was on the King
River, during my stay there I ran in a wild bull which I gave to Lydicher
a farmer he sold him to Carr a Publican and Butcher who killed him for
beef, sometime afterwards I was blamed for stealing this bull from James
Whitty Boggy Creek I asked Whitty Oxley racecourse why he blamed me for
stealing his bull he said he had found his bull and never blamed me but
his son-in-law Farrell told him he heard I sold the bull to Carr not long
afterwards I heard again I was blamed for stealing a mob of calves from
Whitty and Farrell which I knew nothing about. I began to think they
wanted me to give them something to talk about.

Therefore I started wholesale and retail horse and cattle dealing Whitty
and Burns not being satisfied with all the picked land on the Boggy Creek
and King River and the run of their stock on the certificate ground free
and no one interfering with them paid heavy rent to the banks for all the
open ground so as a poor man could keep no stock, and impounded every
beast they could get, even off Government roads. If a poor man happened
to leave his horse or bit of a poddy calf outside his paddock they would
be impounded. I have known over 60 head of horses impounded in one day by
Whitty and Burns all belonging to poor farmers they would have to leave
their ploughing or harvest or other employment to go to Oxley.

When they would get there perhaps not have money enough to release them
and have to give a bill of sale or borrow the money which is no easy
matter. And along with this sort of work, Farrell the Policeman stole a
horse from George King and had him in Whitty and Farrells Paddocks until
he left the force. And all this was the cause of me and my step-father
George King taking their horses and selling them to Baumgarten and
Kennedy. the pick of them was taken to a good market and the culls were
kept in Petersons paddock and their brands altered by me two was sold to
Kennedy and the rest to Baumgarten who were strangers to me and I believe
honest men.

They paid me full value for the horses and could not have known they were
stolen. no person had anything to do with the stealing and selling of the
horses but me and George King. William Cooke who was convicted for
Whittys horses was innocent he was not in my company at Petersons. But it
is not the place of the Police to convict guilty men as it is by them
they get their living had the right parties been convicted it would have
been a bad job for the Police as Berry would have sacked a great many of
them only I came to their aid and kept them in their bilits and good
employment and got them double pay and yet the ungrateful articles
convicted my mother and an infant my brother-in-law and another man who
was innocent and still annoy my brothers and sisters and the ignorant
unicorns even threaten to shoot myself But as soon as I am dead they will
be heels up in the muroo.

there will be no more police required they will be sacked and supplanted
by soldiers on low pay in the towns and special constables made of some
of the farmers to make up for this double pay and expence. It will pay
Government to give those people who are suffering innocence, justice and
liberty. if not I will be compelled to show some colonial stratagem which
will open the eyes of not only the Victoria Police and inhabitants but
also the whole British army and now doubt they will acknowledge their
hounds were barking at the 20 wrong stump.

And that Fitzpatrick will be the cause of greater slaughter to the Union
Jack than Saint Patrick was to the snakes and toads in Ireland. The Queen
of England was as guilty as Baumgarten and Kennedy Williamson and
Skillion of what they were convicted for When the horses were found on
the Murray River I wrote a letter to Mr Swanhill of Lake Rowan to
acquaint the Auctioneer and to advertize my horses for sale I brought
some of them to that place but did not sell I sold some of them in
Benalla Melbourne and other places and left the colony and became a
rambling gambler soon after I left there was a warrant for me and the
Police searched the place and watched night and day for two or three
weeks and when they could not snare me they got a warrant against my
brother Dan And on the 15 of April Fitzpatrick came to the Eleven Mile
Creek to arrest him he had some conversation with a horse dealer whom he
swore was William Skillion this man was not called in Beechworth, besides
several other Witnesses, who alone could have proved Fitzpatricks
falsehood after leaving this man he went to the house asked was Dan in
Dan came out.

I hear previous to this Fitzpatrick had some conversation with Williamson
on the hill. he asked Dan to come to Greta with him as he had a warrant
for him for stealing Whitty's horses Dan said all right they both went
inside Dan was having something to eat his mother asked Fitzpatrick what
he wanted Dan for. the trooper said he had a warrant for him Dan then
asked him to produce it he said it was only a telegram sent from Chiltren
but Sergeant Whelan ordered him to releive Steel at Greta and call and
arrest Dan and take him into Wangaratta next morning and get him remanded
Dans mother said Dan need not go without a warrant unless he liked and
that the trooper had no business on her premises without some Authority
besides his own word The trooper pulled out his revolver and said he
would blow her brains out if she interfered.

in the arrest she told him it was a good job for him Ned was not there or
he would ram the revolver down his throat Dan looked out and said Ned is
coming now, the trooper being off his guard looked out and when Dan got
his attention drawn he dropped the knife and fork which showed he had no
murderous intent and slapped heenans hug on him took his revolver and
kept him there until Skillion and Ryan came with horses which Dan sold
that night. The trooper left and invented some scheme to say that he got
shot which any man can see is false, he told Dan to clear out that
Sergeant Steel and Detective Brown and Strachan would be there before
morning Strachan had been over the Murray trying to get up a case against
him and they would convict him if they caught him as the stock society
offored an enticement for witnesses to swear anything and the germans
over the Murray would swear to the wrong man as well as the right.

Next day Williamson and my mother was arrested and Skillion the day after
who was not there at all at the time of the row which can be proved by 8
or 9 witnesses And the Police got great credit and praise in the papers
for arresting the mother of 12 children one an infant on her breast and
those two quiet hard working innocent men who would not know the
difference a revolver and a saucepan handle and kept them six months
awaiting trial and then convicted them on the evidence of the meanest
article that ever the sun shone on it seems that the jury was well chosen
by the Police as there was a discharged Sergeant amongst them which is
contrary to law they thought it impossible for a Policeman to swear a lie
but I can assure them it is by that means and hiring cads they get
promoted I have heard from a trooper that he never knew Fitzpatrick to be
one night sober and that he sold his sister to a chinaman but he looks a
young strapping rather genteel more fit to be a starcher to a laundress
than a Policeman.

For to a keen observer he has the wrong appearance or a manly heart the
deceit and cowardice is too plain to be seen in the puny cabbage hearted
looking face. I heard nothing of this transaction until very close on the
trial I being then over 400 miles from Greta when I heard I was outlawed
and a hundred pound reward for me for shooting at a trooper in Victoria
and a hundred pound for any man that could prove a conviction of
horse-stealing against me so I came back to Victoria knew I would get no
justice if I gave myself up I enquired after my brother Dan and found him
digging on Bullock Creek heard how the Police used to be blowing that
they would not ask me to stand they would shoot me first and then cry
surrender and how they used to rush into the house upset all the milk
dishes break tins of eggs empty the flour out of the bags on to the
ground and even the meat out of the cask and destroy all the provisions
and shove the girls in front of them into the rooms like dogs so as if
anyone was there they would shoot the girls first but they knew well I
was not there or I would have scattered their blood and brains like rain
I would manure the Eleven mile with their bloated carcasses and yet
remember there is not one drop of murderous blood in my Veins.

Superintendent Smith used to say to my sisters, see all the men I have
out today I will have as many more tomorrow and we will blow him into
pieces as small as paper that is in our guns Detective Ward and Constable
Hayes took out their revolvers and threatened to shoot the girls and
children in Mrs Skillions absence the greatest ruffians and murderers no
matter how deprived would not be guilty of such a cowardly action, and
this sort of cruelty and disgraceful and cowardly conduct to my brothers
and sisters who had no protection coupled with the conviction of my
mother and those men certainly made my blood boil as I dont think there
is a man born could have the patience to suffer it as long as I did or
ever allow his blood to get cold while such insults as these were
unavenged and yet in every paper that is printed I am called the blackest
and coldest blooded murderer ever on record.

But if I hear any more of it I will not exactly show them what cold
blooded murder is but wholesale and retail slaughter something different
to shooting three troopers in self defence and robbing a bank. I would
have been rather hot-blooded to throw down my rifle and let them shoot me
and my innocent brother, they were not satisfied with frightening my
sisters night and day and destroying their provisions and lagging my
mother and infant and those innocent men but should follow me and my
brother into the wilds where he had been quietly digging neither
molesting or inter-fering with anyone he was making good wages as the
creek is very rich within half a mile from where I shot Kennedy.

I was not there long and on the 25 of October I came on Police tracks
between Table top and the bogs. I crossed them and returning in the
evening I came on a dif-ferent lot of tracks making for the shingle hut I
went to our camp and told my brother and his two mates me and my brother
went and found their camp at the shingle hut about a mile from my
brothers house saw they carried long firearms and we knew our doom was
sealed if we could not beat those before the others would come As I knew
the other party of Police would soon join them and if they came on us at
our camp they would shoot us down like dogs at our work as we had only
two guns. we thought it best to try and bail those up take their
fire-arms and ammunition and horses and we could stand a chance with the
rest We approached the spring as close as we could get to the camp as the
intervening space being clear ground and no battery We saw two men at the
logs they got up and one took a double barreled fowling-piece and fetched
a horse down and hobbled him at the tent we thought there were more men
in the tent asleep those being on sentry we could have shot those two men
without speaking but not wishing to take their lives we waited McIntyre
laid the gun against a stump and Lonigan sat on the log I advanced, my
brother Dan keepin McIntyre covered which he took to be constable Flood
and had he not obeyed my orders, or at-tempted to reach for the gun or
draw his revolver he would have been shot dead but when I called on them
to throw up their hands McIntyre obeyed and Lonigan ran some six or seven
yards to a battery of logs insted of dropping behind the one he was
sitting on, he had just got to the logs and put his head up to take aim
when I shot him that instant or he would have shot me as I took him to be
Strachan the man who said he would not ask me to stand he would shoot me
first like a dog.

But it happened to be Lonigan the man who in company with Sergeant Whelan
Fitzpatrick and King the Boot maker and constable O. Day that tried to
put a pair of hand-cuffs on me in Benalla but could not and had to allow
McInnis the miller to put them on, previous to Fitzpatrick swear-ing he
was shot, I was fined two pounds for hitting Fitzpatrick and two pounds
for not allowing five curs like Sergeant Whelan O. Day Fitz-patrick King
and Lonigan who caught me by the privates and would have sent me to
Kingdom come only I was not ready and he is the man that blowed before he
left Violet Town if Ned Kelly was to be shot he was the man would shoot
him and no doubt he would shoot me even if I threw up my arms and laid
down as he knew four of them could not arrest me single-handed not to
talk of the rest of my mates, also either me or him would have to die,
this he knew well therefore he had a right to keep out of my road,
Fitzpatrick is the only one I hit out of the five in Benalla this shows
my feeling towards him as he said we were good friends & even swore it
but he was the biggest enemy I had in the country with the exception of
Lonigan and he can be thankful I was not there when he took a revolver
and threatened to shoot my mother in her own house it is not fire three
shots and miss him at a yard and a half I dont think I would use a
revolver to shoot a man like him when I was within a yard and a half of
him or attempt to fire into a house where my mother brothers and sisters
was. and according to Fitzpatricks statement all around him a man that is
such a bad shot as to miss a man three times at a yard and a half would
never attempt to fire into a house among a house full of women and
children while I had a pairs of arms and bunch of fives on the end of
them that never failed to peg out anything they came in contact with and
Fitzpatrick knew the weight of one of them only too well, as it run
against him once in Benalla, and cost me two pound odd as he is very
subject to fainting.

As soon as I shot Lonigan he jumped up and staggered some distance from
the logs with his hands raised and then fell he surrendered but too late
I asked McIntyre who was in the tent he replied no one. I advanced and
took possession of their two revolvers and fowling-piece which I loaded
with bullets instead of shot. I asked McIntyre where his mates was he
said they had gone down the creek, and he did not expect them that night
he asked me was I going to shoot him and his mates. I told him no.

I would shoot no man if he gave up his arms and leave the force he said
the police all knew Fitzpatrick had wronged us. and he intended to leave
the force, as he had bad health, and his life was insured, he told me he
intended going home and that Kennedy and Scanlan were out looking for our
camp and also about the other Police he told me the N.S.W Police had shot
a man for shooting Sergeant Walling I told him if they did, they had shot
the wrong man And I expect your gang came to do the same with me he said
no they did not come to shoot me they came to apprehend me I asked him
what they carried spenceir rifles and breech loading fowling pieces and
so much ammunition for as the Police was only supposed to carry one
revolver and 6 cartridges in the revolver but they had eighteen rounds of
revolver cartridges each three dozen for the fowling piece and twenty one
spenceir-rifle cartridges and God knows how many they had away with the
rifle this looked as if they meant not only to shoot me only to riddle me
but I dont know either Kennedy Scanlan or him and had nothing against
them, he said he would get them to give up their arms if I would not
shoot them as I could not blame them, they had to do their duty I said I
did not blame them for doing honest duty but I could not suffer them
blowing me to pieces in my own native land and they knew Fitzpatrick
wronged us and why not make it public and convict him but no they would
rather riddle poor unfortunate creoles.

but they will rue the day ever Fitzpatrick got among them, Our two mates
came over when they heard the shot fired but went back again for fear the
Police might come to our camp while we were all away and manure bullock
flat with us on our arrival. I stopped at the logs and Dan went back to
the spring for fear the tropers would come in that way but I soon heard
them coming up the creek. I told McIntyre to tell them to give up their
arms, he spoke to Kennedy who was some distance in front of Scanlan he
reached for his revolver and jumped off, on the off side of his horse and
got behind a tree when I called on them to throw up their arms and
Scanlan who carried the rifle slewed his horse around to gallop away but
the horse would not go and as quick as thought fired at me with the rifle
without unslinging it and was in the act of firing again when I had to
shoot him and he fell from his horse.

I could have shot them without speaking but their lives was no good to
me. McIntyre jumped on Kennedys horse and I allowed him to go as I did
not like to shoot him after he surrendered or I would have shot him as he
was between me and Kennedy therefore I could not shoot Kennedy without
shooting him first. Kennedy kept firing from behind the tree my brother
Dan advanced and Kennedy ran I followed him he stopped behind another
tree and fired again.

I shot him in the arm pit and he dropped his revolver and ran I fired
again with the gun as he slewed around to surrender I did not know he had
dropped his revolver. the bullet passed through the right side of his
chest & he could not live or I would have let him go had they been my own
brother I could not help shooting there or else let them shoot me which
they would have done had their bullets been directed as they intended
them. But as for handcuffing Kennedy to a tree or cutting his ear off or
brutally treating any of them, is a falsehood, if Kennedys ear was cut
off it was not done by me and none of my mates was near him after he was
shot I put his cloak over him and left him as well as I could and were
they my own brothers I could not have been more sorry for them this
cannot be called wilful murder for I was compelled to shoot them, or lie
down and let them shoot me it would not be wilful murder if they packed
our remains in, shattered into a mass of animated gore to Mansfield, they
would have got great praise and credit as well as promotion but I am
reconed a horrid brute because I had not been cowardly enough to lie down
for them under such trying circumstances and insults to my people
certainly their wives and children are to be pitied but they must
remember those men came into the bush with the intention of scattering
pieces of me and my brother all over the bush and yet they know and
acknowledge I have been wronged and my mother and four or five men lagged
innocent and is my brothers and sisters and my mother not to be pitied
also who has no alternative only to put up with the brutal and cowardly
conduct of a parcel of big ugly fat-necked wombat headed big bellied
magpie legged narrow hipped splaw-footed sons of Irish Bailiffs or
english landlords which is better known as Officers of Justice or
Victorian Police who some calls honest gentlemen but I would like to know
what business an honest man would have in the Police as it is an old
saying It takes a rogue to catch a rogue and a man that knows nothing
about roguery would never enter the force an take an oath to arrest
brother sister father or mother if required and to have a case and
conviction if possible.

Any man knows it is possible to swear a lie and if a policeman looses a
conviction for the sake of swearing a lie he has broke his oath therefore
he is a perjurer either ways. A Policeman is a disgrace to his country,
not alone to the mother that suckled him, in the first place he is a
rogue in his heart but too cowardly to follow it up without having the
force to disguise it. next he is traitor to his country ancestors and
religion as they were all catholics before the Saxons and Cranmore yoke
held sway since then they were perse cuted massacreed thrown into
martrydom and tortured beyond the ideas of the present generation What
would people say if they saw a strapping big lump of an Irishman
shepherding sheep for fifteen bob a week or tailing turkeys in Tallarook
ranges for a smile from Julia or even begging his tucker, they would say
he ought to be ashamed of himself and tar-and-feather him.

But he would be a king to a policeman who for a lazy loafing cowardly
bilit left the ash corner deserted the shamrock, the emblem of true wit
and beauty to serve under a flag and nation that has destroyed massacreed
and murdered their fore-fathers by the greatest of torture as rolling
them down hill in spiked barrels pulling their toe and finger nails and
on the wheel. and every torture imaginable more was transported to Van
Diemand's Land to pine their young lives away in starvation and misery
among tyrants worse than the promised hell itself all of true blood bone
and beauty, that was not murdered on their own soil, or had fled to
America or other countries to bloom again another day, were doomed to
Port Mcquarie Toweringabbie norfolk island and Emu plains and in those
places of tyrany and condemnation many a blooming Irishman rather than
subdue to the Saxon yoke Were flogged to death and bravely died in
servile chains but true to the shamrock and a credit to Paddys land What
would people say if I became a policeman and took an oath to arrest my
brothers and sisters & relations and convict them by fair or foul means
after the conviction of my mother and the persecutions and insults
offered to myself and people Would they say I was a decent gentleman, and
yet a police-man is still in worse and guilty of meaner actions than that
The Queen must surely be proud of such herioc men as the Police and Irish
soldiers as It takes eight or eleven of the biggest mud crushers in
Melbourne to take one poor little half starved larrakin to a watch house.

I have seen as many as eleven, big & ugly enough to lift Mount Macedon
out of a crab hole more like the species of a baboon or Guerilla than a
man. actually come into a court house and swear they could not arrest one
eight stone larrakin and them armed with battens and neddies without some
civilians assistance and some of them going to the hospital from the
affects of hits from the fists of the larrakin and the Magistrate would
send the poor little Larrakin into a dungeon for being a better man than
such a parcel of armed curs. What would England do if America declared
war and hoisted a green flag as its all Irishmen that has got command of
her armies forts and batteries even her very life guards and beef tasters
are Irish would they not slew around and fight her with their own arms
for the sake of the colour they dare not wear for years. and to reinstate
it and rise old Erins isle once more, from the pressure and tyrannism of
the English yoke, which has kept it in poverty and starvation, and caused
them to wear the enemys coats.

What else can England expect. Is there not big fat-necked Unicorns enough
paid to torment and drive me to do thing which I dont wish to do, without
the public assisting them I have never interefered with any person unless
they deserved it, and yet there are civilians who take firearms against
me, for what reason I do not know, unless they want me to turn on them
and exterminate them without medicine. I shall be compelled to make an
example of some of them if they cannot find no other employment If I had
robbed and plundered ravished and murdered everything I met young and old
rich and poor. the public could not do any more than take firearms and
Assisting the police as they have done, but by the light that shines
pegged on an ant-bed with their bellies opened their fat taken out
rendered and poured down their throat boiling hot will be fool to what
pleasure I will give some of them and any person aiding or harbouring or
assisting the Police in any way whatever or employing any person whom
they know to be a detective or cad or those who would be so deprived as
to take blood money will be outlawed and declared unfit to be allowed
human buriel their property either consumed or confiscated and them
theirs and all belonging to them exterminated off the face of the earth,
the enemy I cannot catch myself I shall give a payable reward for,

I would like to know who put that article that reminds me of a poodle dog
half clipped in the lion fashion, called Brooke E. Smith Superin-tendent
of Police he knows as much about commanding Police as Cap-tain Standish
does about mustering mosquitoes and boiling them down for their fat on
the back blocks of the Lachlan for he has a head like a turnip a stiff
neck as big as his shoulders narrow hipped and pointed towards the feet
like a vine stake and if there is any one to be called a murderer
regarding Kennedy, Scanlan and Lonigan it is that mis-placed poodle he
gets as much pay as a dozen good troopers, if there is any good in them,
and what does he do for it he cannot look behind him without turning his
whole frame it takes three or four police to keep sentry while he sleeps
in Wangaratta, for fear of body snatchers do they think he is a superior
animal to the men that has to guard him if so why not send the men that
gets big pay and reconed superior to the common police after me and you
shall soon save the country of high salaries to men that is fit for
nothing else but getting better men than him self shot and sending orphan
children to the industrial school to make prostitutes and cads of them
for the Detectives and other evil dis-posed persons.

Send the high paid and men that received big salaries for years in a gang
by themselves after me, As it makes no difference to them but it will
give them a chance of showing whether they are worth more pay than a
common trooper or not and I think the Public will soon find they are only
in the road of good men and obtaining money under false pretences, I do
not call McIntyre a coward for I reckon he is as game a man as wears the
jacket as he had the presence of mind to know his position, directly as
he was spoken to, and only foolishness to disobey, it was cowardice that
made Lonigan and the others fight it is only foolhardiness to disobey an
outlaw as any Police-man or other man who do not throw up their arms
directly as I call on them knows the consequence which is a speedy
dispatch to Kingdom Come, I wish those men who joined the stock
protection society to with-draw their money and give it and as much more
to the widows and orphans and poor of Greta district wher I spent and
will again spend many a happy day fearless free and bold as it only aids
the police to procure false witnesses and go whacks with men to steal
horses and lag innocent men it would suit them far better to subscribe a
sum and give it to the poor of their district and there is no fear of
anyone stealing their property for no man could steal their horses
without the knowledge of the poor if any man was mean enough to steal
their property the poor would rise out to a man and find them if they
were on the face of the earth it will always pay a rich man to be liberal
with the poor and make as little enemies as he can as he shall find if
the poor is on his side he shall loose nothing by it, If they depend in
the police they shall be drove to destruction,

As they can not and will not protect them if duffing and bushranging were
abolished the police would have to cadge for their living I speak from
experience as I have sold horses and cattle innumerable and yet eight
head of the culls is all ever was found I never was interfered with
whilst I kept up this successful trade. I give fair warning to all those
who has reason to fear me to sell out and give P10 out of every hundred
towards the widow and orphan fund and do not attempt to reside in
Victoria but as short a time as possible after reading this notice,
neglect this and abide by the consequences, which shall be worse than the
rust in the wheat in Victoria or the druth of a dry season to the
grasshoppers in New South Wales I do not wish to give the order full
force without giving timely warning. but I am a widows son outlawed and
my orders must be obeyed.



End of this Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook
The Jerilderie Letter by Edward (Ned) Kelly [Dictated to Joe Byrne in 1879]




Project Gutenberg Australia


