
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Through the Dragon Glass
Author: Abraham Merritt
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0601921.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: June 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2007

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

Title: Through the Dragon Glass
Author: Abraham Merritt



Herndon helped loot the Forbidden City when the Allies turned the
suppression of the Boxers into the most gorgeous burglar-party since
the days of Tamerlane. Six of his sailormen followed faithfully his
buccaneering fancy. A sympathetic Russian highness whom he had
entertained in New York saw to it that he got to the coast and his
yacht. That is why Herndon was able to sail through the Narrows with as
much of the Son of Heaven's treasures as the most accomplished laborer
in Peking's mission vineyards.

Some of the loot he gave to charming ladies who had dwelt or were
still dwelling on the sunny side of his heart. Most of it he used to
fit up those two astonishing Chinese rooms in his Fifth Avenue house.
And a little of it, following a vague religious impulse, he presented
to the Metropolitan Museum. This, somehow, seemed to put the stamp of
legitimacy on his part of the pillage--like offerings to the gods and
building hospitals and peace palaces and such things.

But the Dragon Glass, because he had never seen anything quite so
wonderful, he set up in his bedroom Where he could look at it the
first thing in the morning, and he placed shaded lights about it so
that he could wake up in the night and look at it! Wonderful? It is
more than wonderful, the Dragon Glass! Whoever made it lived when the
gods walked about the earth creating something new every day. Only a
man who lived in that sort of atmosphere could have wrought it. There
was never anything like it.

I was in Hawaii when the cables told of Herndon's first disappearance.
There wasn't much to tell. His man had gone to his room to awaken him
one morning--and Herndon wasn't there. All his clothes were, though,
Everything was just as if Herndon ought to be somewhere in the house--
only he wasn't.

A man worth ten millions can't step out into thin air and vanish
without leaving behind him the probability of some commotion,
naturally. The newspapers attend to the commotion, but the columns of
type boiled down to essentials contained just two facts--that Herndon
had come home the night before, and in the morning he was
undiscoverable.

I was on the high seas, homeward bound to help the search, when the
wireless told the story of his reappearance. They had found him on the
floor of his bedroom, shreds of a silken robe on him, and his body
mauled as though by a tiger. But there was no more explanation of his
return than there had been of his disappearance.

The night before he hadn't been there--and in the morning there he
was. Herndon, when he was able to talk, utterly refused to confide
even in his doctors. I went straight through to New York, and waited
until the men of medicine decided that it was better to let him see me
than have him worry any longer about not seeing me.

Herndon got up from a big invalid chair when I entered. His eyes were
clear and bright, and there was no weakness in the way he greeted me,
nor in the grip of his hand. A nurse slipped from the room.

"What was it, Jim?" I cried. "What on earth happened to you?"

"Not so sure it was on earth," he said. He pointed to what looked like
a tall easel hooded with a heavy piece of silk covered with
embroidered Chinese characters. He hesitated for a moment and then
walked over to a closet. He drew out two heavy-bore guns, the very
ones, I remembered, that he had used in his last elephant hunt.

"You won't think me crazy if I ask you to keep one of these handy
while I talk, will you, Ward?" he asked rather apologetically. "This
looks pretty real, doesn't it?"

He opened his dressing gown and showed me his chest swathed in
bandages. He gripped my shoulder as I took without question one of the
guns. He walked to the easel and drew off the hood.

"There it is," said Herndon.

And then, for the first time, I saw the Dragon Glass!

There never has been anything like that thing! Never! At first all you
saw was a cool, green, glimmering translucence, like the sea when you
are swimming under water on a still summer day and look up through it.
Around its edges ran flickers of scarlet and gold, flashes of emerald,
shimmers of silver and ivory. At its base a disk of topaz rimmed with
red fire shot up dusky little vaporous yellow flames.

Afterward you were aware that the green translucence was an oval slice
of polished stone. The flashes and flickers became dragons. There were
twelve of them. Their eyes were emeralds, their fangs were ivory,
their claws were gold. There were scaled dragons, and each scale was
so inlaid that the base, green as the primeval jungle, shaded off into
vivid scarlet, and the scarlet into tips of gold. Their wings were of
silver and vermilion, and were folded close to their bodies.

But they were alive, those dragons. There was never so much life in
metal and wood since Al-Akram, the Sculptor of ancient Ad, carved the
first crocodile, and the jealous Almighty breathed life into it for a
punishment!

And last you saw that the topaz disk that sent up the little yellow
flames was the top of a metal sphere around which coiled a thirteenth
dragon, thin and red, and biting its scorpion-tipped tail.

It took your breath away, the first glimpse of the Dragon Glass. Yes,
and the second and third glimpse, too--and every other time you looked
at it.

"Where did you get it?" I asked, a little shakily.

Herndon said evenly: "It was in a small hidden crypt in the Imperial
Palace. We broke into the crypt quite by"--he hesitated--"well, call
it accident. As soon as I saw it I knew I must have it. What do you
think of it?"

"Think!" I cried. "Think! Why, it's the most marvelous thing that the
hands of man ever made! What is that stone? Jade?"

"I'm not sure," said Herndon. "But come here. Stand just in front of
me."

He switched out the lights in the room. He turned another switch, and
on the glass opposite me three shaded electrics threw their rays into
its mirror-like oval.

"Watch!" said Herndon. "Tell me what you see!"

I looked into the glass. At first I could see nothing but the rays
shining farther, farther--back into infinite distances, it seemed. And
then.

"Good God!" I cried, stiffening with horror. "Jim, what hellish thing
is this?"

"Steady, old man," came Herndon's voice. There was relief and a
curious sort of joy in it. "Steady; tell me what you see."

I said: "I seem to see through infinite distances--and yet what I see
is as close to me as though it were just on the other side of the
glass. I see a cleft that cuts through two masses of darker green. I
see a claw, a gigantic, hideous claw that stretches out through the
cleft. The claw has seven talons that open and close--open and close.
Good God, such a claw, Jim! It is like the claws that reach out from
the holes in the lama's hell to grip the blind souls as they shudder
by!"

"Look, look farther, up through the cleft, above the claw. It widens.
What do you see?"

I said: "I see a peak rising enormously high and cutting the sky like
a pyramid. There are flashes of flame that dart from behind and
outline it. I see a great globe of light like a moon that moves slowly
out of the flashes; there is another moving across the breast of the
peak; there is a third that swims into the flame at the farthest
edge--"

"The seven moons of Rak," whispered Herndon, as though to himself.
"The seven moons that bathe in the rose flames of Rak which are the
fires of life and that circle Lalil like a diadem. He upon whom the
seven moons of Rak have shone is bound to Lalil for this life, and for
ten thousand lives."

He reached over and turned the switch again. The lights of the room
sprang up.

"Jim," I said, "it can't be real! What is it? Some devilish illusion
in the glass?"

He unfastened the bandages about his chest.

"The claw you saw had seven talons," he answered quietly. "Well, look
at this."

Across the white flesh of his breast, from left shoulder to the lower
ribs on the right, ran seven healing furrows. They looked as though
they had been made by a gigantic steel comb that had been drawn across
him. They gave one the thought they had been ploughed.

"The claw made these," he said as quietly as before.

"Ward," he went on, before I could speak, "I wanted you to see--what
you've seen. I didn't know whether you would see it. I don't know
whether you'll believe me even now. I don't suppose I would if I were
in your place--still--"

He walked over and threw the hood upon the Dragon Glass.

"I'm going to tell you," he said. "I'd like to go through it--
uninterrupted. That's why I cover it.

"I don't suppose," he began slowly--"I don't suppose, Ward, that
you've ever heard of Rak the Wonder-Worker, who lived somewhere back at
the beginning of things, nor how the Greatest Wonder-Worker banished
him somewhere outside the world?"

"No," I said shortly, still shaken by the sight.

"It's a big part of what I've got to tell you," he went on. "Of course
you'll think it rot, but--I came across the legend in Tibet first.
Then I ran across it again--with the names changed, of course--when I
was getting away from China.

"I take it that the gods were still fussing around close to man when
Rak was born. The story of his parentage is somewhat scandalous. When
he grew older Rak wasn't satisfied with just seeing wonderful things
being done. He wanted to do them himself, and he--well, he studied the
method. After a while the Greatest Wonder-Worker ran across some of
the things Rak had made, and he found them admirable--a little too
admirable. He didn't like to destroy the lesser wonder-worker because,
so the gossip ran, he felt a sort of responsibility. So he gave Rak a
place somewhere--outside the world--and he gave him power over every
one out of so many millions of births to lead or lure or sweep that
soul into his domain so that he might build up a people--and over his
people Rak was given the high, the low, and the middle justice.

"And outside the world Rak went. He fenced his domain about with
clouds. He raised a great mountain, and on its flank he built a city
for the men and women who were to be his. He circled the city with
wonderful gardens, and he placed in the gardens many things, some good
and some very--terrible. He set around the mountain's brow seven moons
for a diadem, and he fanned behind the mountain a fire which is the
fire of life, and through which the moons pass eternally to be born
again." Herndon's voice sank to a whisper.

"Through which the moons pass," he said. "And with them the souls of
the people of Rak. They pass through the fires and are born again--and
again--for ten thousand lives. I have seen the moons of Rak and the
souls that march with them into the fires. There is no sun in the
land--only the new-born moons that shine green on the city and on the
gardens."

"Jim," I cried impatiently. "What in the world are you talking about?
Wake up, man! What's all that nonsense got to do with this?"

I pointed to the hooded Dragon Glass.

"That," he said. "Why, through that lies the road to the gardens of
Rak!"

The heavy gun dropped from my hand as I stared at him, and from him to
the glass and back again. He smiled and pointed to his bandaged
breast.

He said: "I went straight through to Peking with the Allies. I had an
idea what was coming, and I wanted to be in at the death. I was among
the first to enter the Forbidden City. I was as mad for loot as any of
them. It was a maddening sight, Ward. Soldiers with their arms full of
precious stuff even Morgan couldn't buy; soldiers with wonderful
necklaces around their hairy throats and their pockets stuffed with
jewels; soldiers with their shirts bulging treasures the Sons of
Heaven had been hoarding for centuries! We were Goths sacking imperial
Rome. Alexander's hosts pillaging that ancient gemmed courtezan of
cities, royal Tyre! Thieves in the great ancient scale, a scale so
great that it raised even thievery up to something heroic.

"We reached the throne-room. There was a little passage leading off to
the left, and my men and I took it. We came into a small octagonal
room. There was nothing in it except a very extraordinary squatting
figure of jade. It squatted on the floor, its back turned toward us.
One of my men stooped to pick it up. He slipped. The figure flew from
his hand and smashed into the wall. A slab swung outward. By a--well,
call it a fluke, we had struck the secret of the little octagonal
room!

"I shoved a light through the aperture. It showed a crypt shaped like a
cylinder. The circle of the floor was about ten feet in diameter. The
walls were covered with paintings, Chinese characters, queer-looking
animals, and things I can't well describe. Around the room, about seven
feet up, ran a picture. It showed a sort of island floating off into
space. The clouds lapped its edges like frozen seas full of rainbows.
There was a big pyramid of a mountain rising out of the side of it.
Around its peak were seven moons, and over the peak--a face!

"I couldn't place that face and I couldn't take my eyes off it. It
wasn't Chinese, and it wasn't of any other race I'd ever seen. It was
as old as the world and as young as tomorrow. It was benevolent and
malicious, cruel and kindly, merciful and merciless, saturnine as
Satan and as joyous as Apollo. The eyes were as yellow as buttercups,
or as the sunstone on the crest of the Feathered Serpent they worship
down in the Hidden Temple of Tuloon. And they were as wise as Fate.

"'There's something else here, sir,' said Martin--you remember Martin,
my first officer. He pointed to a shrouded thing on the side. I
entered, and took from the thing a covering that fitted over it like a
hood. It was the Dragon Glass!

"The moment I saw it I knew I had to have it--and I knew I would have
it. I felt that I did not want to get the thing away any more than the
thing itself wanted to get away. From the first I thought of the
Dragon Glass as something alive. Just as much alive as you and I are.
Well, I did get it away. I got it down to the yacht, and then the
first odd thing happened.

"You remember Wu-Sing, my boat steward? You know the English Wu-Sing
talks. Atrocious! I had the Dragon Glass in my stateroom. I'd
forgotten to lock the door. I heard a whistle of sharply indrawn
breath. I turned, and there was Wu-Sing. Now, you know that Wu-Sing
isn't what you'd call intelligent-looking. Yet as he stood there
something seemed to pass over his face, and very subtly change it. The
stupidity was wiped out as though a sponge had been passed over it. He
did not raise his eyes, but he said, in perfect English, mind you;
'Has the master augustly counted the cost of his possession?'

"I simply gaped at him.

"'Perhaps,' he continued, 'the master has never heard of the
illustrious Hao-Tzan? Well, he shall hear.'"

"Ward, I couldn't move or speak. But I know now it wasn't sheer
astonishment that held me. I listened while Wu-Sing went on to tell in
polished phrase the same story that I had heard in Tibet, only there
they called him Rak instead of Hao-Tzan. But it was the same story."

"'And,' he finished, 'before he journeyed afar, the illustrious Hao-Tzan
caused a great marvel to be wrought. He called it the Gateway.' Wu-Sing
waved his hand to the Dragon Glass. 'The master has it. But what shall
he who has a Gateway do but pass through it? Is it not better to leave
the Gateway behind--unless he dare go through it?'"

"He was silent. I was silent, too. All I could do was wonder where the
fellow had so suddenly got his command of English. And then Wu-Sing
straightened. For a moment his eyes looked into mine. They were as
yellow as buttercups, Ward, and wise, wise! My mind rushed back to the
little room behind the panel. Ward--. The eyes of Wu-Sing were the
eyes of the face that brooded over the peak of the moons!"

"And all in a moment, the face of Wu-Sing dropped back into its old
familiar stupid lines. The eyes he turned to me were black and
clouded. I jumped from my chair."

"'What do you mean, you yellow fraud!' I shouted. 'What do you mean by
pretending all this time that you couldn't talk English?'"

"He looked at me stupidly, as usual. He whined in his pidgin that he
didn't understand; that he hadn't spoken a word to me until then. I
couldn't get anything else out of him, although I nearly frightened
his wits out. I had to believe him. Besides, I had seen his eyes.
Well, I was fair curious by this time, and I was more anxious to get
the glass home safely than ever."

"I got it home. I set it up here, and I fixed those lights as you saw
them. I had a sort of feeling that the glass was waiting--for
something. I couldn't tell just what. But that it was going to be
rather important, I knew--"

He suddenly thrust his head into his hands, and rocked to and fro.

"How long, how long," he moaned, "how long, Santhu?"

"Jim!" I cried. "Jim! What's the matter with you?"

He straightened. "In a moment you'll understand," he said.

And then, as quietly as before: "I felt that the glass was waiting.
The night I disappeared I couldn't sleep. I turned out the lights in
the room; turned them on around the glass and sat before it. I don't
know how long I sat, but all at once I jumped to my feet. The dragons
seemed to be moving! They were moving! They were crawling round and
round the glass. They moved faster and faster. The thirteenth dragon
spun about the topaz globe. They circled faster and faster until they
were nothing but a halo of crimson and gold flashes. As they spun, the
glass itself grew misty, mistier, mistier still, until it was nothing
but a green haze. I stepped over to touch it. My hand went straight on
through it as though nothing were there.

"I reached in--up to the elbow, up to the shoulder. I felt my hand
grasped by warm little fingers. I stepped through--"

"Stepped through the glass?" I cried.

"Through it," he said, "and then--I felt another little hand touch my
face. I saw Santhu!

"Her eyes were as blue as the corn flowers, as blue as the big
sapphire that shines in the forehead of Vishnu, in his temple at
Benares. And they were set wide, wide apart. Her hair was blue-black,
and fell in two long braids between her little breasts. A golden
dragon crowned her, and through its paws slipped the braids. Another
golden dragon girded her. She laughed into my eyes, and drew my head
down until my lips touched hers. She was lithe and slender and
yielding as the reeds that grow before the Shrine of Hathor that
stands on the edge of the Pool of Djeeba. Who Santhu is or where she
came from---how do I know? But this I know--she is lovelier than any
woman who ever lived on earth. And she is a woman!

"Her arms slipped from about my neck and she drew me forward. I looked
about me. We stood in a cleft between two great rocks. The rocks were
a soft green, like the green of the Dragon Glass. Behind us was a
green mistiness. Before us the cleft ran only a little distance.
Through it I saw an enormous peak jutting up like a pyramid, high,
high into a sky of chrysoprase. A soft rose radiance pulsed at its
sides, and swimming slowly over its breast was a huge globe of green
fire. The girl pulled me towards the opening. We walked on silently,
hand in hand. Quickly it came to me--Ward, I was in the place whose
pictures had been painted in the room of the Dragon Glass!

"We came out of the cleft and into a garden. The Gardens of
Many-Columned Iram, lost in the desert because they were too beautiful,
must have been like that place. There were strange, immense trees whose
branches were like feathery plumes and whose plumes shone with fires
like those that clothe the feet of Indra's dancers. Strange flowers
raised themselves along our path, and their hearts glowed like the
glow-worms that are fastened to the rainbow bridge to Asgard. A wind
sighed through the plumed trees, and luminous shadows drifted past their
trunks. I heard a girl laugh, and the voice of a man singing.

"We went on. Once there was a low wailing far in the garden, and the
girl threw herself before me, her arms outstretched. The wailing
ceased, and we went on. The mountain grew plainer. I saw another great
globe of green fire swing out of the rose flashes at the right of the
peak. I saw another shining into the glow at the left. There was a
curious trail of mist behind it. It was a mist that had tangled in it
a multitude of little stars. Everything was bathed in a soft green
light--such a light as you would have if you lived within a pale
emerald.

"We turned and went along another little trail. The little trail ran
up a little hill, and on the hill was a little house. It looked as
though it was made of ivory. It was a very odd little house. It was
more like the Jain pagodas at Brahmaputra than anything else. The
walls glowed as though they were full light. The girl touched the
wall, and a panel slid away. We entered, and the panel closed after
us.

"The room was filled with a whispering yellow light. I say whispering
because that is how one felt about it. It was gentle and alive. A
stairway of ivory ran up to another room above. The girl pressed me
toward it. Neither of us had uttered a word. There was a spell of
silence upon me. I could not speak. There seemed to be nothing to say.
I felt a great rest and a great peace--as though I had come home. I
walked up the stairway and into the room above. It was dark except for
a bar of green light that came through the long and narrow window.
Through it I saw the mountain and its moons. On the floor was an ivory
head-rest and some silken cloths. I felt suddenly very sleepy. I
dropped to the cloths, and at once was asleep.

"When I awoke the girl with the cornflower eyes was beside me! She was
sleeping. As I watched, her eyes opened. She smiled and drew me to
her--"

"I do not know why, but a name came to me. 'Santhu!' I cried. She
smiled again, and I knew that I had called her name. It seemed to me
that I remembered her, too, out of immeasurable ages. I arose and
walked to the window. I looked toward the mountain. There were now two
moons on its breast. And then I saw the city that lay on the
mountain's flank. It was such a city as you see in dreams, or as the
tale-tellers of El-Bahara fashion out of the mirage. It was all of
ivory and shining greens and flashing blues and crimsons. I could see
people walking about its streets. There came the sound of little
golden bells chiming.

"I turned toward the girl. She was sitting up, her hands clasped about
her knees, watching me. Love came, swift and compelling. She arose--I
took her in my arms--

"Many times the moons circled the mountains, and the mist held the
little, tangled stars passing with them. I saw no one but Santhu; no
thing came near us. The trees fed us with fruits that had in them the
very essences of life. Yes, the fruit of the Tree of Life that stood
in Eden must have been like the fruit of those trees. We drank of
green water that sparkled with green fires, and tasted like the wine
Osiris gives the hungry souls in Amenti to strengthen them. We bathed
in pools of carved stone that welled with water yellow as amber.
Mostly we wandered in the gardens. There were many wonderful things in
the gardens. They were very unearthly. There was no day nor night.
Only the green glow of the ever-circling moons. We never talked to
each other. I don't know why. Always there seemed nothing to say.

"Then Santhu began to sing to me. Her songs were strange songs. I
could not tell what the words were. But they built up pictures in my
brain. I saw Rak the Wonder-Worker fashioning his gardens, and filling
them with things beautiful and things--evil. I saw him raise the peak,
and knew that it was Lalil; saw him fashion the seven moons and kindle
the fires that are the fires of life. I saw him build his city, and I
saw men and women pass into it from the world through many gateways.

"Santhu sang--and I knew that the marching stars in the mist were the
souls of the people of Rak which sought rebirth. She sang, and I saw
myself ages past walking in the city of Rak with Santhu beside me. Her
song wailed, and I felt myself one of the mist-entangled stars. Her
song wept, and I felt myself a star that fought against the mist, and,
fighting, break away--a star that fled out and out through
immeasurable green space--

"A man stood before us. He was very tall. His face was both cruel and
kind, saturnine as Satan and joyous as Apollo. He raised his eyes to
us, and they were yellow as buttercups, and wise, so wise! Ward, it
was the face above the peak in the room of the Dragon Glass! The eyes
that had looked at me out of Wu-Sing's face! He smiled on us for a
moment and then--he was gone!

"I took Santhu by the hand and began to run. Quite suddenly it came to
me that I had enough of the haunted gardens of Rak; that I wanted to
get back to my own land. But not without Santhu. I tried to remember
the road to the cleft. I felt that there lay the path back. We ran.
From far behind came a wailing. Santhu screamed--but I knew the fear
in her cry was not for herself. It was for me. None of the creatures
of that place could harm her who was herself one of its creatures. The
wailing drew closer. I turned.

"Winging down through the green air was a beast, an unthinkable beast,
Ward! It was like the winged beast of the Apocalypse that is to bear
the woman arrayed in purple and scarlet. It was beautiful even in its
horror. It closed its scarlet and golden wings, and its long, gleaming
body shot at me like a monstrous spear.

"And then--just as it was about to strike--a mist threw itself between
us! It was a rainbow mist, and it was--cast. It was cast as though a
hand had held it and thrown it like a net. I heard the winged beast
shriek its disappointment, Santhu's hand gripped mine tighter. We ran
through the mist.

"Before us was the cleft between the two green rocks. Time and time
again we raced for it, and time and time again that beautiful shining
horror struck at me--and each time came the thrown mist to baffle it.
It was a game! Once I heard a laugh, and then I knew who was my
hunter. The master of the beast and the caster of the mist. It was he
of the yellow eyes--and he was playing me--playing me as a child plays
with a cat when he tempts it with a piece of meat and snatches the
meat away again and again from the hungry jaws!

"The mist cleared away from its last throw, and the mouth of the cleft
was just before us. Once more the thing swooped--and this time there
was no mist. The player had tired of the game! As it struck, Santhu
raised herself before it. The beast swerved--and the claw that had
been stretched to rip me from throat to waist struck me a glancing
blow. I fell--fell through leagues and leagues of green space.

"When I awoke I was here in this bed, with the doctor men around me
and this--" He pointed to his bandaged breast again.

"That night when the nurse was asleep I got up and looked into the
Dragon Glass, and I saw--the claw, even as you did. The beast is
there. It is waiting for me!"

Herndon was silent for a moment.

"If he tires of the waiting he may send the beast through for me," he
said. "I mean the man with the yellow eyes. I've a desire to try one
of these guns on it. It's real, you know, the beast is--and these guns
have stopped elephants."

"But the man with the yellow eyes, Jim," I whispered--"who is he?"

"He," said Herndon--"why, he's the Wonder-Worker himself!"

"You don't believe such a story as that!" I cried. "Why, it's--it's
lunacy! It's some devilish illusion in the glass. It's like the--
crystal globe that makes you hypnotize yourself and think the things
your own mind creates are real. Break it, Jim! It's devilish! Break
it!"

"Break it!" he said incredulously. "Break it? Not for the ten thousand
lives that are the toll of Rak! Not real? Aren't these wounds real?
Wasn't Santhu real? Break it! Good God, man, you don't know what you
say! Why, it's my only road back to her! If that yellow-eyed devil back
there were only as wise as he looks, he would know he didn't have to
keep his beast watching there. I want to go, Ward; I want to go and
bring her back with me. I've an idea, somehow, that he hasn't--well,
full control of things. I've an idea that the Greatest Wonder-Worker
wouldn't put wholly in Rak's hands the souls that wander through the
many gateways into his kingdom. There's a way out, Ward; there's a way
to escape him. I won away from him once, Ward. I'm sure of it. But
then I left Santhu behind. I have to go back for her. That's why I
found the little passage that led from the throne-room. And he knows
it, too. That's why he had to turn his beast on me."

"And I'll go through again, Ward. And I'll come back again--with
Santhu!"

But he has not returned. It is six months now since he disappeared for
the second time. And from his bedroom, as he had done before. By the
will that they found--the will that commended that in event of his
disappearing as he had done before and not returning within a week I
was to have his house and all that was within it--I came into
possession of the Dragon Glass. The dragons had spun again for Herndon,
and he had gone through the gateway once more. I found only one of the
elephant guns, and I knew that he had had time to take the other with
him.

I sit night after night before the glass, waiting for him to come back
through it--with Santhu. Sooner or later they will come. That I know.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


