

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title:      On Ghosts
Author:     Mary Shelley
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0602881.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          July 2006
Date most recently updated: July 2006

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au




Title:      On Ghosts
Author:     Mary Shelley



I look for ghosts--but none will force
Their way to me; 'tis falsely said
That there was ever intercourse
Between the living and the dead.

--Wordsworth


What a different earth do we inhabit from that on which our forefathers
dwelt! The antediluvian world, strode over by mammoths, preyed upon by
the megatherion, and peopled by the offspring of the Sons of God, is a
better type of the earth of Homer, Herodotus, and Plato, than the
hedged-in cornfields and measured hills of the present day. The globe
was then encircled by a wall which paled in the bodies of men, whilst
their feathered thoughts soared over the boundary; it had a brink, and
in the deep profound which it overhung, men's imaginations,
eagle-winged, dived and flew, and brought home strange tales to their
believing auditors. Deep caverns harboured giants; cloud-like birds cast
their shadows upon the plains; while far out at sea lay islands of
bliss, the fair paradise of Atlantis or El Dorado sparkling with untold
jewels. Where are they now? The Fortunate Isles have lost the glory that
spread a halo round them; for who deems himself nearer to the golden
age, because he touches at the Canaries on his voyage to India? Our only
riddle is the rise of the Niger; the interior of New Holland, our only
terra incognita; and our sole mare incognitum, the north-west passage.
But these are tame wonders, lions in leash; we do not invest Mungo Park,
or the Captain of the Hecla, with divine attributes; no one fancies that
the waters of the unknown river bubble up from hell's fountains, no
strange and weird power is supposed to guide the ice-berg, nor do we
fable that a stray pick-pocket from Botany Bay has found the gardens of
the Hesperides within the circuit of the Blue Mountains. What have we
left to dream about? The clouds are no longer the charioted servants of
the sun, nor does he any more bathe his glowing brow in the bath of
Thetis; the rainbow has ceased to be the messenger of the Gods, and
thunder longer their awful voice, warning man of that which is to come.
We have the sun which has been weighed and measured, but not understood;
we have the assemblage of the planets, the congregation of the stars,
and the yet unshackled ministration of the winds:--such is the list of
our ignorance.

Nor is the empire of the imagination less bounded in its own proper
creations, than in those which were bestowed on it by the poor blind
eyes of our ancestors. What has become of enchantresses with their
palaces of crystal and dungeons of palpable darkness? What of fairies
and their wands? What of witches and their familiars? and, last, what of
ghosts, with beckoning hands and fleeting shapes, which quelled the
soldier's brave heart, and made the murderer disclose to the astonished
noon the veiled work of midnight? These which were realities to our
fore-fathers, in our wiser age--

--Characterless are grated
To dusty nothing.

Yet is it true that we do not believe in ghosts? There used to be
several traditionary tales repeated, with their authorities, enough to
stagger us when we consigned them to that place where that is which "is
as though it had never been." But these are gone out of fashion.
Brutus's dream has become a deception of his over-heated brain, Lord
Lyttleton's vision is called a cheat; and one by one these inhabitants
of deserted houses, moonlight glades, misty mountain tops, and midnight
church-yards, have been ejected from their immemorial seats, and small
thrill is felt when the dead majesty of Denmark blanches the cheek and
unsettles the reason of his philosophic son.

But do none of us believe in ghosts? If this question be read at
noon-day, when--

Every little corner, nook, and hole,
Is penetrated with the insolent light--

at such a time derision is seated on the features of my reader. But let
it be twelve at night in a lone house; take up, I beseech you, the story
of the Bleeding Nun; or of the Statue, to which the bridegroom gave the
wedding ring, and she came in the dead of night to claim him, tall, and
cold; or of the Grandsire, who with shadowy form and breathless lips
stood over the couch and kissed the foreheads of his sleeping
grandchildren, and thus doomed them to their fated death; and let all
these details be assisted by solitude, flapping curtains, rushing wind,
a long and dusky passage, an half open door--O, then truly, another
answer may be given, and many will request leave to sleep upon it,
before they decide whether there be such a thing as a ghost in the
world, or out of the world, if that phraseology be more spiritual. What
is the meaning of this feeling?

For my own part, I never saw a ghost except once in a dream. I feared it
in my sleep; I awoke trembling, and lights and the speech of others
could hardly dissipate my fear. Some years ago I lost a friend, and a
few months afterwards visited the house where I had last seen him. It
was deserted, and though in the midst of a city, its vast halls and
spacious apartments occasioned the same sense of loneliness as if it had
been situated on an uninhabited heath. I walked through the vacant
chambers by twilight, and none save I awakened the echoes of their
pavement. The far mountains (visible from the upper windows) had lost
their tinge of sunset; the tranquil atmosphere grew leaden coloured as
the golden stars appeared in the firmament; no wind ruffled the
shrunk-up river which crawled lazily through the deepest channel of its
wide and empty bed; the chimes of the Ave Maria had ceased, and the bell
hung moveless in the open belfry: beauty invested a reposing world, and
awe was inspired by beauty only. I walked through the rooms filled with
sensations of the most poignant grief. He had been there; his living
frame had been caged by those walls, his breath had mingled with that
atmosphere, his step had been on those stones, I thought:--the earth
is a tomb, the gaudy sky a vault, we but walking corpses. The wind
rising in the east rushed through the open casements, making them shake;
--methought, I heard, I felt--I know not what--but I trembled. To have
seen him but for a moment, I would have knelt until the stones had been
worn by the impress, so I told myself, and so I knew a moment after, but
then I trembled, awe-struck and fearful. Wherefore? There is something
beyond us of which we are ignorant. The sun drawing up the vaporous air
makes a void, and the wind rushes in to fill it,--thus beyond our
soul's ken there is an empty space; and our hopes and fears, in gentle
gales or terrific whirlwinds, occupy the vacuum; and if it does no more,
it bestows on the feeling heart a belief that influences do exist to
watch and guard us, though they be impalpable to the coarser faculties.

I have heard that when Coleridge was asked if he believed in ghosts,--
he replied that he had seen too many to put any trust in their reality;
and the person of the most lively imagination that I ever knew echoed
this reply. But these were not real ghosts (pardon, unbelievers, my mode
of speech) that they saw; they were shadows, phantoms unreal; that while
they appalled the senses, yet carried no other feeling to the mind of
others than delusion, and were viewed as we might view an optical
deception which we see to be true with our eyes, and know to be false
with our understandings. I speak of other shapes. The returning bride,
who claims the fidelity of her betrothed; the murdered man who shakes to
remorse the murderer's heart; ghosts that lift the curtains at the foot
of your bed as the clock chimes one; who rise all pale and ghastly from
the churchyard and haunt their ancient abodes; who, spoken to, reply;
and whose cold unearthly touch makes the hair stand stark upon the head;
the true old-fashioned, foretelling, flitting, gliding ghost,--who has
seen such a one?

I have known two persons who at broad daylight have owned that they
believed in ghosts, for that they had seen one. One of these was an
Englishman, and the other an Italian. The former had lost a friend he
dearly loved, who for awhile appeared to him nightly, gently stroking
his cheek and spreading a serene calm over his mind. He did not fear the
appearance, although he was somewhat awe-stricken as each night it
glided into his chamber, and,

Ponsi del letto insula sponda manca.
[placed itself on the left side of the bed]

This visitation continued for several weeks, when by some accident he
altered his residence, and then he saw it no more. Such a tale may
easily be explained away;--but several years had passed, and he, a man
of strong and virile intellect, said that "he had seen a ghost."

The Italian was a noble, a soldier, and by no means addicted to
superstition: he had served in Napoleon's armies from early youth, and
had been to Russia, had fought and bled, and been rewarded, and he
unhesitatingly, and with deep relief, recounted his story.

This Chevalier, a young, and (somewhat a miraculous incident) a gallant
Italian, was engaged in a duel with a brother officer, and wounded him
in the arm. The subject of the duel was frivolous; and distressed
therefore at its consequences he attended on his youthful adversary
during his consequent illness, so that when the latter recovered they
became firm and dear friends. They were quartered together at Milan,
where the youth fell desperately in love with the wife of a musician,
who disdained his passion, so that it preyed on his spirits and his
health; he absented himself from all amusements, avoided all his brother
officers, and his only consolation was to pour his love-sick plaints
into the ear of the Chevalier, who strove in vain to inspire him either
with indifference towards the fair disdainer, or to inculcate lessons of
fortitude and heroism. As a last resource he urged him to ask leave of
absence; and to seek, either in change of scene, or the amusement of
hunting, some diversion to his passion. One evening the youth came to
the Chevalier, and said, "Well, I have asked leave of absence, and am to
have it early tomorrow morning, so lend me your fowling-piece and
cartridges, for I shall go to hunt for a fortnight." The Chevalier gave
him what he asked; among the shot there were a few bullets. "I will take
these also," said the youth, "to secure myself against the attack of any
wolf, for I mean to bury myself in the woods."

Although he had obtained that for which he came, the youth still
lingered. He talked of the cruelty of his lady, lamented that she would
not even permit him a hopeless attendance, but that she inexorably
banished him from her sight, "so that," said he, "I have no hope but in
oblivion." At length lie rose to depart. He took the Chevalier's hand
and said, "You will see her to-morrow, you will speak to her, and hear
her speak; tell her, I entreat you, that our conversation tonight has
been concerning her, and that her name was the last that I spoke." "Yes,
yes," cried the Chevalier, "I will say any thing you please; but you
must not talk of her any more, you must forget her." The youth embraced
his friend with warmth, but the latter saw nothing more in it than the
effects of his affection, combined with his melancholy at absenting
himself from his mistress, whose name, joined to a tender farewell, was
the last sound that he uttered.

When the Chevalier was on guard that night, he heard the report of a
gun. He was at first troubled and agitated by it, but afterwards thought
no more of it, and when relieved from guard went to bed, although he
passed a restless, sleepless night. Early in the morning some one
knocked at his door. It was a soldier, who said that he had got the
young officer's leave of absence, and had taken it to his house; a
servant had admitted him, and he had gone up stairs, but the room door
of the officer was locked, and no one answered to his knocking, but
something oozed through from under the door that looked like blood. The
Chevalier, agitated and frightened at this account, hurried to his
friend's house, burst open the door, and found him stretched on the
ground--he had blown out his brains, and the body lay a headless trunk,
cold, and stiff.

The shock and grief which the Chevalier experienced in consequence of
this catastrophe produced a fever which lasted for some days. When he
got well, he obtained leave of absence, and went into the country to try
to divert his mind. One evening at moonlight, he was returning home from
a walk, and passed through a lane with a hedge on both sides, so high
that he could not see over them. The night was balmy; the bushes gleamed
with fireflies, brighter than the stars which the moon had veiled with
her silver light. Suddenly he heard a rustling near him, and the figure
of his friend issued from the hedge and stood before him, mutilated as
he had seen him after his death. This figure he saw several times,
always in the same place. It was impalpable to the touch, motionless,
except in its advance, and made no sign when it was addressed. Once the
Chevalier took a friend with him to the spot. The same rustling was
heard, the same shadow slept forth, his companion fled in horror, but
the Chevalier staid, vainly endeavouring to discover what called his
friend from his quiet tomb, and if any act of his might give repose to
the restless shade.

Such are my two stories, and I record them the more willingly, since
they occurred to men, and to individuals distinguished the one for
courage and the other for sagacity. I will conclude my "modern
instances," with a story told by M. G. Lewis, not probably so authentic
as these, but perhaps more amusing. I relate it as nearly as possible in
his own words.

"A gentleman journeying towards the house of a friend, who lived on the
skirts of an extensive forest, in the east of Germany, lost his way. He
wandered for some time among the trees, when he saw a light at a
distance. On approaching it he was surprised to observe that it
proceeded from the interior of a ruined monastery. Before he knocked at
the gate he thought it proper to look through the window. He saw a
number of cats assembled round a small grave, four of whom were at that
moment letting down a coffin with a crown upon it. The gentleman
startled at this unusual sight, and, imagining that he had arrived at
the retreats of fiends or witches, mounted his horse and rode away with
the utmost precipitation. He arrived at his friend's house at a late
hour, who sate up waiting for him. On his arrival his friend questioned
him as to the cause of the traces of agitation visible in his face. He
began to recount his adventures after much hesitation, knowing that it
was scarcely possible that his friend should give faith to his relation.
No sooner had he mentioned the coffin with the crown upon it, than his
friend's cat, who seemed to have been lying asleep before the fire,
leaped up, crying out, 'Then I am king of the cats;' and then scrambled
up the chimney, and was never seen more."


THE END




Project Gutenberg Australia


