

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The Unholy Compact Abjured
Author: Charles Pigault-Lebrun
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0606321.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: August 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


The Unholy Compact Abjured
Charles Pigault-Lebrun




In the churchyard of the town of Salins, department of Jura, may still
be seen the remains of a tomb, on which is sculptured in figures as
rude as the age in which they were carved, a representation of a
soldier, firmly clasped in the arms of a maiden; near them stands the
devil in a menacing attitude. Though the inhabitants of the town are
all ready to swear to the truth of the story, they are not agreed as
to the time when it happened; so that we can only say, that some
centuries have rolled away, since a young soldier named St Amand, a
native of Salins, was returning after a long absence to the bosom of
his family. He walked with quick and cheerful steps, carrying with
ease, in a small knapsack, the whole of his worldly goods. Never since
he quitted the paternal roof, had he felt so happy; for he hoped ere
night, to see his pretty cousin, Ninette, whom he loved with all his
heart, and whom he intended to make his wife.

He walked on, gaily carolling, till he saw a cross-road before him,
and uncertain of his way, he called to an old woman, with her back
towards him, to direct him. She was silent: and, as he ap-proached, he
repeated the call, and she raised her head to answer it. The stout
heart of the young soldier quailed, as he cast his eyes upon a
countenance, such as never before had met his gaze.

He had indeed, reason to tremble; for he had just disturbed in the
middle of an incantation, one of the most powerful witches in the
country. She regarded him with a demoniac smile, and said in a tone
which froze his blood, "Turn where thou wilt, thy road is sure,--it
leads to death!"

For some moments, he stood as if rooted to the spot; but, soon, fear
of the sorceress, who remained gazing upon him, gave him strength to
flee. He ran forward, nor stopped till he had completely lost sight of
the fearful being, whose dreadful prediction had struck him with such
horror. Suddenly a frightful storm arose; the thunder growled, and the
lightning flashed round the weary traveller, who, drenched with rain,
and overcome with fatigue, had hardly strength to proceed. How great
was his joy, when he saw at a distance, a magnificent chateau, the
gate of which stood open. He exerted all his remaining strength to
reach it, and precipitately entered a large hall. There he stopped,
expecting every moment to see some domestics, but no one appeared. He
remained some time, watching the progress of the storm: at length it
began to abate, and he determined to pursue his way; but as he
approached the door, it closed with a loud noise, and all his efforts
to open it were vain.

Struck with astonishment and dismay, the young soldier now believed
that the prediction of the witch was about to be accomplished, and
that he was doomed to fall a sacrifice to magic art.

Exhausted by his vain efforts to open the ponderous door, he sank for
a moment in helpless despondency, on the marble pavement; put his
trust in providence, and soon revived. He said his prayers, and
rising, waited with firmness the issue of this extraordinary
adventure. When he became composed enough to look round him, he
examined the hall in which he was: a pair of folding doors at the
further end, flattered him with the hope of escape that way; but they
too, were fastened. The hall was of immense size, entirely
unfurnished; the walls, pavement and ceiling, were of black marble;
there were no windows, but a small sky-light faintly admitted the
light of day, into this abode of gloom, where reigned a silence like
that of the tomb. Hour after hour passed; this mournful silence
remained still undisturbed; and St Amand, overcome with fatigue and
watching, at length sunk into a deep, though perturbed slumber.

His sleep was soon disturbed by a frightful dream: he heard all at
once, the sound of a knell,.mingled with the cries of bats, and owls,
and a hollow voice, murmured in his ear, "Woe to those who trouble the
repose of the dead!" He started on his feet, but what a sight met his
eyes! The hall was partially illuminated by flashes of sulphurious
fire; on the pavement was laid the body of a man newly slain, and
covered with innumerable wounds, from which, a band of unearthly
forms, whose fearful occupation, proclaimed the hellish origin, were
draining the yet warm blood.

St Amand uttered a shriek of terror, and was in an instant surrounded
by the fiends: already were their fangs, from which the remains of
their horrid feast still dripped, extended to grasp him, when he
hastily made the sign of the cross, and sank senseless upon the
ground. When he regained his senses, the infernal band had vanished,
and he saw bending over him, an old man, magnificently but strangely
dressed: his silken garments flowed loosely around him, and were
embroidered with figures of different animals, and mystic devices. His
countenance was majestic, and his venerable white beard descended
below his girdle: but his features had a wild and gloomy expression:
his eyes, above all, had in their glance, that which might appal the
stoutest heart. St Amand shrunk from this mysterious being, with awe,
mingled with abhorrence, and a cold shudder ran through his veins, as
the old man bent upon him his piercing eyes.

"Rash youth," cried he in a severe tone, "how is it that thou hast
dared to enter this place, where never mortal foot save mine has
trod?"

"I came not willingly," replied St Amand, trembling; "an evil destiny,
and not vain curiosity brought me hither."

"Thou wouldst not the less have expiated thy presumption with thy
life, but for my aid.
"
returned the old man, austerely. "I have saved thee from the vampires
who guard it, and it depends upon me, whether thou shalt not still
become their prey."

"Oh! save me, then, I pray thee!"

"And why should I save thee?" demanded the venerable magician. "What
price art thou willing to give me for thy life?"

"Alas! I have nothing worthy of thy acceptance," sighed St Amand.

"But thou may'st have; and it is only through thee that I can obtain
what I most desire."

"How?"

"The blood of a dove, for me, would be a treasure, but I may not kill
one; she must be slain for me, by one whose life I have saved. Should
I liberate thee, a dove will fly to thy bosom; swear that thou wilt
instantly sacrifice her for me, and thou shalt be free."

"I swear it!"

Hardly had St Amand uttered the words, when he found himself in the
chamber of Ninette, who, with a cry of joy, rushed into his arms. He
pressed her with transport to his breast; but scarcely had he embraced
her, when he saw the magician standing by his side.

"Wretch!" cried he, "is it thus thou keepest thine oath? Pierce her
heart--she is the dove that thou must instantly sacrifice, if thou
wilt not become a feast for the vampires!"

"Sacrifice her? Never! Never!"

"Then, thou art my prey!" and the fiend assuming his own form, sprang
towards his victim; but he stopped suddenly--he dared not seize him:
for the maiden held him firmly clasped in her arms, and the little
cross of gold, which night and day she wore upon her bosom, had been
blest by the venerable priest, whose gift it was. Thus, nought unholy
dared approach the maiden, and the baffled fiend fled with a
tremendous yell, as the crowing of the cock, announced the approach of
dawn.

The cries of the maiden soon brought the neighbours to her chamber,
and among them was the pastor, to whom St Amand related his adventure.
"Oh, my son!" said the good priest, "what have you done? See you not,
that you have entered into a contract with the powers of darkness?
Unable to wreak their vengeance on you, when you had guarded yourself
with the blessed sign of our redemption, the fiend has had recourse to
craft to draw you into his power. You have promised a sacrifice, to
the enemy of God and man, but you have done it in ignorance. Abjure
then, solemnly, the cursed contract, and dread no longer the vengeance
of the fiend."

The young soldier made the required abjuration, during which, the most
dreadful noises were heard: it was the last effort of the demon's
vengeance; for, from that time, he was never seen, nor heard of. St
Amand married Ninette, who had given him such a courageous proof of
her love; and the cross transmitted from her, to her descendants, was
always considered by them as the most precious part of their
inheritance. In process of time, the family became wealthy, and a
great grandson of St Amand erected the monument we have described, to
commemorate the miraculous escape of his ancestor.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


