

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title: The Diver
Author: A. J. Alan
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0609251.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: December 2006
Date most recently updated: December 2006

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Diver
Author: A. J. Alan





For some reason or other the B.B.C. are always asking me to tell a ghost
story--at least, they don't ask me, they tell me I've got to. I say,
"What kind of a ghost story?" and they say, "Any kind you like, so long
as it's a personal experience and perfectly true."

Just like that; and it's cramped my style a bit. Not that my personal
experiences aren't true. Please don't think that. But it's simply this:
that when it comes to supernatural matters my luck hasn't been very
good. It isn't that I don't believe in such things on principle, but I
do like to be present when the manifestations actually occur, instead of
just taking other people's word for them; and, somehow or other, as I've
said before, my luck has not been very good.

Lots of people have tried to convert me. There was one young woman in
particular. She took a lot of trouble about it--quite a lot. She used to
dra--take me to all sorts of parties where they had séances--you know
the kind: table-turning, planchette, and so on--but it wasn't any good.
Nothing ever happened when I was there. Nothing spiritual, that is.
People always said:

"Ah, my boy, you ought to have been here last night. The table fairly
got up and hit us in the face."

Possibly very wonderful--but, after all, the ground will do that if you
let it.

Well, as I say, they took me to several of these parties, and we used to
sit for hours round tables, in a dim light, holding hands. That was
rather fun sometimes--it depended on who one sat next to--but apart from
that, the nights they took me no manifestations ever occurred.
Planchette wouldn't spell a word, and the table might have been screwed
to the floor. To begin with they used to put it down to chance, or the
conditions not being favourable. But after a time they began to put it
down to me--and I thought: "Something will have to be done about it."
It's never amusing to be looked upon as a sort of Jonah.

So I invented a patent table-tapper. It was made on the same principle
as lazy tongs. You held it between your knees, and when you squeezed it
a little mallet shot up (it was really a cotton reel stuck on the end of
a pencil) and it hit the underneath of the table a proper biff. It was
worked entirely with the knees, so that I could still hold the hands of
the people on either side of me. And it was a success from the word
"Go."

At the very next séance, as soon as the lights were down, I gave just a
gentle tap. Our host said:

"Ah, a powerful force is present!" and I gave a louder--ponk! Then he
said:

"How do you say 'Yes'?"--and I said:

"Ponk!" Then he said:

"How do you say 'No'?" And I said:

"Ponk, ponk!"

So far so good. Communication established. Then people began asking
questions and I spelt out the answers. Awful hard work ponking right
through the alphabet, but quite worth it. I'm afraid some of my answers
made people sit up a bit. They got quite nervous as to what was coming
next. Needless to say, this was some years ago.

Then some one said:

"Who's going to win the Derby?" (I don't know _who_ said that) and I
laboriously spelt out Signorinetta. This was two days before the race. I
don't know _why_ I said Signorinetta, because there were several horses
with shorter names, but it just came into my head. The annoying thing
was that I didn't take my own tip and back it. You may remember it won
at 100 to 1 by I don't know how many lengths--five lengths dividing
second and third. However, it's no use crying over the stable door after
the horse has spilt the milk, and it has nothing whatever to do with the
story.

The amusing thing was that when the séance was over various people came
round to me and said:

"_Now_ will you believe in spiritualism?" "What more proof do you want?"
and so on and so forth. It struck me as rather rich that they should try
to convert me with my own false evidence. And I don't mind betting you
that if I'd owned up to the whole thing being a spoof, not a soul would
have believed me. That's always the way.

I've told you all this to show that I'm not exactly dippy on the subject
of spiritualism--at any rate, not the table-turning variety--very
largely because it _is_ so easy to fake your results.

But when something _genuinely_ uncanny comes along--why, then I'm one of
the very first to be duly thrilled and mystified and--what not. It's one
of those _genuine_ cases I want to tell you about. It happened to me
personally. But first of all you must know that there's a swimming-bath
at my club. Very good swimming-bath, too. Deep at one end and shallow at
the other. There's a sort of hall-place adjoining it, and in this hall
there's a sandwich bar--very popular. It's much cheaper than lunching
upstairs. Quite a lot of people seem to gravitate down there--especially
towards the end of the month. Everything's quite informal. You just go
to the counter and snatch what you want and take it to a table and eat
it. Then when you've done, you go and tell George what you've had.
George runs the show, and he says "one-and-ninepence," or whatever it
is, and that's that.

Personally, I usually go to a table in a little recess close to the edge
of the swimming-bath itself. You have to go down a few steps to get to
it. But you are rather out of the turmoil and not so likely to get
anything spilt over you. It's quite dangerous sometimes, people darting
in and out like a lot of sharks--which reminds me: a member once wrote
in to the secretary complaining that the place wasn't safe--I shan't say
who it was, but you'd know his name if I told you; I managed to get hold
of a copy of his letter. This is what he says, speaking of the sandwich
bar:

"I once saw an enormous shark, at least five feet ten inches long, go up
to the counter and seize a sausage roll--itself nearly four inches
long--and take it away to devour it. When he had bitten off the end,
which he did with a single snap of his powerful jaws, he found that it
was empty. The sausage, which ought to have been inside, had completely
vanished. It had been stolen by another shark even more voracious and
ferocious than himself.

"Never shall I forget the awful spectacle of the baffled and impotent
rage of this fearful monster. He went back to the counter, taking the
empty sarcophagus with him, and said: 'George, I have been stung!'

"In order to avoid such scenes of unparalleled and revolting
cruelty"--after that he is rather inclined to exaggerate, so I shan't
read any more--I usually go late, when the rush is over and it's fairly
quiet. People come and practise diving, and sometimes they are worth
watching--and sometimes not.

That's the sort of place it is, and if you know of anywhere less likely
to be haunted I should like to see it. Very well, then.

One day I was just finishing lunch when there was a splash. I was
reading a letter and didn't look up at once, but when I did I was rather
surprised to see no ripples on the water, and no one swimming about, so
I went on with my letter and didn't think any more about it. That was
all that happened that day.

Two or three weeks later, at about the same time, I was again finishing
lunch, and there was another splash. This time I looked up almost at
once and saw the ripples, and it struck me _then_ that it must have been
an extraordinarily clean dive, considering that whoever it was must have
gone in off the top. One could tell that from where the ripples
were--well out in the middle. So I waited for him to come up. But he
didn't come up. Then I thought that he must be doing a length under
water, and I got up and went to the edge of the bath to watch for him.
But still he didn't come up and I got a bit worried. He might have
bumped his head on the bottom, or fainted, or anything, and I saw myself
having to go in after him with all my clothes on.

I sprinted right round the bath, but there was undoubtedly no one in it.
The attendant came out of one of the dressing-rooms and evidently
thought I'd gone cracked, so I went to the weighing-machine and weighed
myself--eleven stone eight--but I don't think he believed me.

That was the second incident. The third came about a fortnight later.
This time I saw the whole thing quite clearly. I was sitting at my usual
table and I saw a man climbing up the ladder leading to the top
diving-board. When he got up there he came out/to the extreme end of the
plank and stood for a few seconds rubbing his chest and so on--like
people often do.

He was rather tall and muscular--dark, with a small moustache--but what
particularly caught my eye was a great big scar he had. It was about
nine inches long and it reached down from his left shoulder towards the
middle of his chest. It looked like a bad gash with a bayonet. It must
have hurt quite a lot when it was done.

I don't know why I took so much notice of him, but I just did, that's
all. And, funnily enough, he seemed to be just as much interested in me
as I was in him. He gave me a most meaning look. I didn't know what it
meant, but it was undoubtedly a meaning look.

As soon as he saw that he'd got me watching him he dived in, and it was
the most gorgeous dive I've ever seen. Hardly any noise or splash--just
a gentle sort of plop as though he'd gone into oil rather than
water--and the ripples died away almost at once. I thought, if only
he'll do that a few more times it'll teach me a lot, and I waited for
him to come up--and waited--and waited--but not a sign.

I went to the edge of the bath, and then I walked right round it. But,
bar the water, it was perfectly empty. However, to make absolutely
certain--I mean that he couldn't have got out without my seeing him--I
dug out the attendant and satisfied myself that no towels
and--er--costumes had been given out since twelve o'clock--it was then
half-past two--and he, the attendant, he'd actually seen the last man
leave.

The thing was getting quite serious. My scarred friend couldn't have
melted away in the water, nor could he have dived slap through the
bottom of the bath--at least, not without leaving some sort of a mark.
So it was obvious that either the man had been a ghost, which was
absurd--who's ever heard of a ghost in a swimming-bath?--I mean the
ideas's too utterly--er--wet for anything--or that there was something
wrong with the light lager I was having for lunch.

I went back to my table and found I'd hardly begun it, and in any case
let me tell you it was _such_ light lager that a gallon of it wouldn't
have hurt a child of six--and--I'm _not_ a child of six. So I ruled that
out, and decided to wait and see if it happened again. It wouldn't have
done to say anything about it. One's friends are apt to be a bit
flippant when you tell 'em things like that. However, I made a point of
sitting at the same table for weeks and weeks afterwards, but old
stick-in-the-mud didn't show up again.

A good long time after this--it must have been eighteen months or
more--I got an invitation to dine with some people called Pringle. They
were old friends of mine, but I hadn't seen them for a long time because
they'd mostly lived in Mexico, and one rather loses touch with people at
that distance. Anyway, they were going back there in a few days, and
this was a sort of farewell dinner.

They'd given up their flat and were staying at an hotel. They'd got
another man dining with them. His name was Melhuish, and he was, with
one exception, the most offensive blighter I've ever come across. Do you
know those people who open their mouths to contradict what you are going
to say before you've even begun to say it? Well, he did that, among
other things. It was rather difficult to be entirely civil to him. He
was travelling back to Mexico with the Pringles, as he'd got the job of
manager to one of their properties. Something to do with oil, but I
didn't quite grasp what, my mind was so taken up with trying to remember
where on earth I'd seen the man before.

Of course _you_ all know. You know he was the man who dived into the
swimming-bath. It sticks out about a mile, naturally; but I'd only seen
him once before in a bad light, and it took me till half-way through the
fish to place him. Then it came back with a rush, and my interest in him
became very lively. He was an American, and he'd come over to England
two months before, looking for a job--so he said. I asked him why he'd
left America, and he didn't hear; but it did seem fairly certain that
he'd never been in Europe before. So when we got to dessert I proceeded
to drop my brick.

I said: "Do you mind telling me whether you have a scar on your chest
like this?" And I described it. The Pringles just stared, but Melhuish
looked as if he were going to have a fit. Then he pulled himself
together and said: "Have you ever been in America?" And I said: "No, not
that I know of." Then he said: "Well, it's a most extraordinary thing,
but I _have_ a scar on my chest," and he went on to explain how he'd got
it.

Funnily enough, he'd gone in for high diving a lot when he was younger,
and taken any amount of prizes, and on one occasion he'd found a sharp
stake at the bottom of a river. He gave us full particulars. Very messy.
But what they all wanted to know was how the--how I knew anything about
it. Of course, it was a great temptation to tell 'em, but they'd only
have thought I'd gone off my rocker, so I started a hare about perhaps
having seen a photograph of his swimming-club in some newspaper or
other. They caught on to that idea quite well, so I left them to it.

The whole thing was by way of being rather a problem, and it kept me
awake that night. Without being up in such matters, it did occur to me
that it might be a warning of some kind. Is it likely that any one--even
a ghost--would take the trouble to come all the way from America simply
to show me how well he could dive? Of course not, and I sort of thought
that a man who was in the habit of going in off the deep end and _not_
coming up again was no fit travelling companion for any friends of mine.
I'm not superstitious, goodness knows! Of course, I don't walk under
ladders, or light three matches with one cigarette, or any of those
things, but that's because they're unlucky--not because I'm
superstitious.

Anyhow, in case the Pringles might be, I went round next day and saw
them. At least, I saw her--he was out--and told her all about the
apparition at the club, and so on. That did it. She fairly went off pop.
It was a portent, a direct intervention of Providence; nothing would
induce her to travel with Melhuish after what she'd heard--and all the
rest of it.

I left her to carry on the good work. I don't know how she managed it,
but the fact remains that the Pringles did _not_ start for Mexico, as
arranged, and Melhuish did.

And now you are expecting me to say that the ship in which he sailed was
never heard of again. But that wouldn't be strictly true. He got to the
other side all right. But the train in which he was travelling through
Mexico had to cross a bridge over a river. A steel bridge, it was. Now
some months previously there'd been a slight scrap between two local
bands of brigands, in the course of which the bridge had been blown up.

When the quarrel was patched up the bridge was patched up, too, but not
with the meticulous care it might have been. The result was that in the
daytime, when the sun was hot and the steelwork fully expanded, it was a
perfectly good bridge, but at night, when it was cold and the girders
had shrunk a bit--well, it didn't always quite meet in the middle.

It so happened that the train in question tried to cross this wretched
bridge at the very moment when it was having rather a job to make both
ends meet--and it simply couldn't bear it. The middle span carried away
and the engine and two carriages crashed through into the river, and
fourteen people were killed. It was very sad about thirteen of them, but
the fourteenth was Mr. Melhuish.

There must be a moral to this story, if I could only think of it; but I
can't, so perhaps some of you can help me by suggesting one....



THE END




Project Gutenberg Australia


