

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title: Major Wilbraham
Author: Hugh Walpole
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0700451.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: April 2007
Date most recently updated: April 2007

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: Major Wilbraham
Author: Hugh Walpole



I am quite aware that in giving you this story, just as I was told it, I
shall incur the charge of downright and deliberate lying.

Especially I shall be told this by any one who knew Wilbraham
personally. Wilbraham was not, of course, his real name, but I think
that there are certain people who will recognize him from the
description of him. I do not know that it matters very much if they do.
Wilbraham himself would certainly not mind did he know. (Does he know?)
It was the thing, above all, that he wanted those last hours before he
died: that I should pass on my conviction of the truth of what he told
me to others. What he did not know was that I was not convinced. How
could I be? But when the whole comfort of his last hours hung on the
simple fact that I was, of course I pretended to the best of my poor
ability. I would have done more than that to make him happy.

Most men are conscious at some time in their lives of having felt for a
member of their own sex an emotion that is something more than simple
companionship. It is a queer feeling quite unlike any other in life,
distinctly romantic, and the more so, perhaps, for having no sex feeling
in it.

Wilbraham roused just that feeling in me I remember, with the utmost
distinctness, at my first meeting with him. It was just after the Boer
War, and old Johnny Beaminster gave a dinner-party to some men pals of
his at the Phoenix.

There were about fifteen of us, and Wilbraham was the only man present
I'd never seen before. He was only a captain then, and neither so
red-faced nor so stout as he afterwards became. He was pretty bulky,
though, even then, and, with his sandy hair cropped close, his staring
blue eyes, his toothbrush moustache, and sharp, alert movements, looked
the typical traditional British officer.

There was nothing at all to distinguish him from a thousand other
officers of his kind, and yet, from the moment I saw him, I had some
especial and personal feeling about him. He was not in type at all the
man to whom at that time I should have felt drawn, but the fact remains
that I wanted to know him more than any other man in the room, and,
although I only exchanged a few words with him that night, I thought of
him for quite a long time afterwards.

It did not follow from this, as it ought to have done, that we became
great friends. That we never were, although it was myself whom he sent
for, three days before his death, to tell me his queer little story. It
was then, at the very last, that he confided to me that he, too, had
felt something at our first meeting "different" from what one generally
feels, that he had always wanted to turn our acquaintance into
friendship and had been too shy. I also was shy--and so we missed one
another, as I suppose, in this funny, constrained-traditional country of
ours, thousands of people miss one another every day.

But although I did not see him very often, and was in no way intimate
with him, I kept my ears open for any account of his doings. From one
point of view--the club window outlook--he was a very usual figure, one
of those stout, rubicund, jolly men, a good polo player, a good man in a
house-party, genial-natured, and none-too-brilliantly brained, whom
every one liked and no one thought about. All this he was on one side of
the report, but, on the other, there were certain stories that were
something more than ordinary.

Wilbraham was obviously a sentimentalist and an enthusiast; there was
the extraordinary case shortly after I first met him of his championship
of X., a man who had been caught card-sharping and received a year's
imprisonment for it. On X. leaving prison, Wilbraham championed and
defended him, put him up for months in his rooms in Duke Street, walked
as often as possible in his company down Piccadilly, and took him over
to Paris. It says a great deal for Wilbraham's accepted normality, and
his general popularity, that this championship of X. did him no harm.
Some men, it is true, did murmur something about "birds of a feather,"
and one or two kind friends warned Wilbraham in the way kind friends
have, and to them he simply said:

"If a feller's a pal he's a pal."

There followed a year or two later the much more celebrated business of
Lady C. I need not go into all that now, but here again Wilbraham
constituted himself her defender, although she robbed, cheated, and
maligned him as she robbed, cheated, and maligned every one who was good
to her. It was quite obvious that he was not in love with her; the
obviousness of it was one of the things in him that annoyed her. He
simply felt, apparently, that she had been badly treated--the very last
thing she had been--gave her any money he had, put his rooms at the
disposal of herself and her friends, and, as I have said, championed her
everywhere.

This affair did very nearly finish him socially and in his regiment. It
was not so much that they minded his caring for Lady C.--after all, any
man can be fooled by any woman--but it was Lady C.'s friends who made
the whole thing so impossible. Well, that affair luckily came to an end
just in time. Lady C. disappeared to Berlin, and was no more seen.

There were other cases, into which I need not go, when Wilbraham was
seen in strange company, always championing somebody who was not worth
the championing. He had no "social tact," and for them, at any rate, no
moral sense. In himself he was the ordinary normal man about town; no
prude, but straight as a man can be in his debts, his love affairs, his
friendships, and his sport. Then came the War. He did brilliantly at
Mons, was wounded twice, went out to Gallipoli, had a touch of
Palestine, and returned to France again to share in Foch's final
triumph.

No man can possibly have had more of the War than he had, and it is my
own belief that he had just a little too much of it.

He had been always perhaps a little "queer," as we are most of us
"queer" somewhere, and the horrors of that horrible war undoubtedly
affected him. Finally he lost, just a week before the Armistice, one of
his best friends, Ross McLean, a loss from which he certainly never
recovered.

I have now, I think, brought together all the incidents that can throw
any kind of light upon the final scene.


In the middle of 1919 he retired from the Army, and it was from this
time to his death that I saw something of him. He went back to his old
rooms at Horton's in Duke Street, and as I was living at that time in
Marlborough Chambers in Jermyn Street, we were within easy reach of one
another. The early part of 1920 was a "queer time." People had become, I
imagine, pretty well accustomed to realizing that those two wonderful
hours of Armistice Day had not ushered in the millennium, any more than
those first marvellous moments of the Russian revolution produced it.

Every one has always hoped for the millennium, but the trouble since the
days of Adam and Eve has always been that people have such different
ideas as to what exactly that millennium shall be. The plain facts of
the matter simply were that during 1919 and 1920 the world changed from
a war of nations to a war of classes, that inevitable change that
history has always shown follows on great wars.

As no one ever reads history, it was natural enough that there should be
a great deal of disappointment, and a great deal of astonishment.
Wilbraham, being a sentimentalist and an idealist, suffered more from
this general disappointment than most people. He had had wonderful
relations with the men under him throughout the war. He was never tired
of recounting how marvellously they had behaved, what heroes they were,
and that it was they who would pull the country together.

At the same time he had a naïve horror of Bolshevism and anything
unconstitutional, and he watched the transformation of his "brave lads"
into discontented and idle workmen with dismay and deep distress. He
used sometimes to come round to my rooms and talk to me; he had the
bewildered air of a man walking in his sleep.

During these months I came to love the man. The attraction that I had
felt for him from the very first deeply underlay all my relations to
him, but as I saw more of him, I found many very positive reasons for my
liking. He was the simplest, bravest, purest, most loyal, and most
unselfish soul alive. He seemed to me to have no faults at all, unless
it were a certain softness towards the wishes of those whom he loved. He
could not bear to hurt anybody, but he never hesitated if some principle
in which he believed was called in question.

He was the best human being I have ever known, or am ever likely to
know.

Well, the crisis arrived with astonishing suddenness. About August 2nd
or 3rd I went down to stay with some friends at the little fishing
village of Rafiel in Glebeshire.

I saw him just before I left London, and he told me that he was going to
stay in town for the first half of August; that he liked London in
August, even though his club would be closed and Horton's delivered over
to the painters.

I heard nothing about him for a fortnight, and then I received a most
extraordinary letter from Box Hamilton, a fellow-clubman of mine and of
Wilbraham's. Had I heard, he said, that poor old Wilbraham had gone
right off his "knocker "? Nobody knew exactly what had happened, but
suddenly one day at lunch-time Wilbraham had turned up at Grey's--the
club to which our own club was a visitor during its cleaning--had
harangued every one about religion in the most extraordinary way, had
burst out from there and started shouting in Piccadilly; had, after
collecting a crowd, disappeared and not been seen until the next
morning, when he had been found nearly killed after a hand-to-hand fight
with the market men in Covent Garden.

It may be imagined how deeply this disturbed me, especially as I felt I
was myself to blame. I had noticed that Wilbraham was ill when I had
seen him in London, and I should either have persuaded him to come with
me to Glebeshire, or stayed with him in London. I was just about to pack
up and go to town when I received a letter from a doctor in a
nursing-home in South Audley Street, saying that a certain Major
Wilbraham was in the home, dying, and asking persistently for myself. I
took a motor to Drymouth, and was in London by five o'clock.


I found the South Audley Street nursing-home, and was at once surrounded
with the hush, the shaded rooms, the scents of medicine and flowers, and
some undefinable cleanliness that belongs to those places.

I waited in a little room, the walls decorated with sporting prints, the
green baize centre table laden with volumes of _Punch_ and the _Tatler_.
Wilbraham's doctor came in to see me, a dapper, smart little man,
efficient and impersonal. He told me that Wilbraham had at most only
twenty-four hours to live, that his brain was quite clear, and that he
was suffering very little pain, that he had been brutally kicked in the
stomach by some man in the Covent Garden crowd, and had there received
the internal injuries from which he was now dying.

"His brain is quite clear," the doctor said. "Let him talk. It can do
him no harm. Nothing can save him. His head is full of queer fancies; he
wants every one to listen to him. He's worrying because there's some
message he wants to send--he wants to give it to you."

When I saw Wilbraham he was so little changed that I felt no shock.
Indeed, the most striking change in him was the almost exultant
happiness in his voice and eyes.

It is true that after talking to him a little I knew that he was dying.
He had that strange peace and tranquillity of mind that one saw so often
with dying men in the War.

I will try to give an exact account of Wilbraham's narrative; nothing
else is of importance in this little story but that narrative. I can
make no comment. I have no wish to do so. I only want to pass it on as
he begged me to do.

"If you don't believe me," he said, "give other people the chance of
doing so. I know that I am dying. I want as many men and women to have a
chance of judging this as is humanly possible. I swear to you that I am
telling the truth, and the exact truth in every detail."

I began my account by saying that I was not convinced.

How could I be convinced?

At the same time I have none of those explanations with which people are
so generously forthcoming on these occasions. I can only say that I do
not think Wilbraham was insane, nor drunk, nor asleep. Nor do I believe
that some one played a practical joke.

Whether Wilbraham was insane between the hours when his visitor left him
and his entrance into the nursing-home I must leave to my readers. I
myself think he was not.

After all, everything depends upon the relative importance that we place
upon ambitions, possessions, emotions--ideas.

Something then suddenly became of so desperate an importance to
Wilbraham that nothing else at all mattered. He wanted every one else to
see the importance of it as he did. That is all.


It had been a hot and oppressive day; London had seemed torrid and
uncomfortable. The mere fact that Oxford Street was "up" annoyed him.
After a slight meal in his flat he went to the promenade concert at
Queen's Hall. It was the second night of the season--Monday
night--Wagner night.

He had heard no Wagner since August 1914, and was anxious to discover
the effect that hearing it again would have upon him. The effect was
disappointing.

The _Meistersinger_ had always been a great opera for him. The third act
music that the orchestra gave to him didn't touch him anywhere. He also
discovered that six years' abstinence had not enraptured him any more
deeply with the rushing fiddles in the _Tannhäuser_ overture, nor with
the spinning music in the _Flying Dutchman_. Then came suddenly the
prelude to the third act of _Tristan_. That caught him, the peace and
tranquillity that he needed lapped him round, he was fully satisfied and
could have listened for another hour--a little strange, he told me,
because the first half of the third act had always bored him with
Tristan's eternal dying. He got up and went away, not caring to stay and
listen to the efforts of an inadequate contralto to over-scream the
orchestra in the last agonies of Götterdämmerung.

He walked home down Regent Street, the quiet melancholy of the pipe
music accompanying him, pleasing him, and tranquillizing him. As he
reached his flat ten o'clock struck from St. James's Church. He asked
the porter whether anyone had wanted him during his absence--whether any
one was waiting for him now. (Some friend had told him that he might
come up and use his spare room one night that week.) No, no one had
been. There was no one there waiting.

Great was his surprise, therefore, when opening the door of his flat he
found some one standing there, one hand resting on the table. His face
turned towards the open door. Stronger, however, than Wilbraham's
surprise was his immediate conviction that he knew his visitor well, and
this was curious, because the face was undoubtedly strange to him.

"I beg your pardon," Wilbraham said, hesitating.

"I wanted to see you," the stranger said, smiling.

When Wilbraham was telling me this part of his story he seemed to be
enveloped--"enveloped" is the word that best conveys my own experience
of him--by some quite radiant happiness; he smiled at me confidentially
as though he were telling me something that I had experienced with him,
and that must give me the same happiness that it gave him.

"Ought I to have expected--ought I to have known?" he stammered.

"No, you couldn't have known," the stranger answered. "You're not late.
I knew when you would come."

Wilbraham told me that during these moments he was surrendering himself
to an emotion of intimacy and companionship that was the most wonderful
thing that he had ever known. It was that intimacy and companionship, he
told me, for which all his days he had been searching. It was the one
thing that life never seemed to give; even in the greatest love, the
deepest friendship, there was that seed of loneliness hidden. He had
never found it in man or woman.

Now it was so wonderful that the first thing that he said was:

"And now you're going to stay, aren't you? You won't go away at once?"

"Of course I'll stay," he answered, "if you want me."

His guest was dressed in some dark suit; there was nothing about him in
any way odd or unusual. His face thin and pale. His smile kindly.

His English was without accent. His voice was soft and very melodious.

But Wilbraham could notice nothing but his eyes; they were the most
beautiful, tender, gentle eyes that he had ever seen in any human being.

They sat down. Wilbraham's overwhelming fear was lest his guest should
leave him. They began to talk, and Wilbraham took it at once as accepted
that his friend knew all about him--everything.

He found himself eagerly plunging into details of scenes, episodes that
he had long put behind him--put behind him for shame, perhaps, or for
regret or for sorrow. He knew at once that there was nothing that he
need veil nor hide--nothing. He had no sense that he must consider
susceptibilities or avoid self-confession that was humiliating.

But he did find, as he talked on, a sense of shame from another side
creep towards him and begin to enclose him. Shame at the smallness,
meanness, emptiness of the things that he declared.

He had had always behind his mistakes and sins a sense that he was a
rather unusual, interesting person; if only his friends knew everything
about him they would be surprised at the remarkable man that he really
was. Now it was exactly the opposite sense that came over him. In the
gold-rimmed mirror that was over his mantelpiece he saw himself
diminishing, diminishing, diminishing. First himself, large, red-faced,
smiling, rotund, lying back in his chair: then the face shrivelling, the
limbs shortening, then the face small and peaked, the hands and legs
little and mean, then the chair enormous about and around the little
trembling animal cowering against the cushion.

He sprang up.

"No, no! I can't tell you any more--and you've known it all so long. I
am mean, small, nothing. I have not even great ambition--nothing."

His guest stood up and put his hand on his shoulder. They talked,
standing side by side, and he said some things that belonged to
Wilbraham alone, that he would not tell me.

Wilbraham asked him why he had come--and to him.

"I will come now to a few of my friends," he said. "First one and then
another. Many people have forgotten me behind my words. They have built
up such a mountain over me with the doctrines they have attributed to
me, the things that they say that I did. I am not really," he said,
laughing, his hand on Wilbraham's shoulder, "so dull and gloomy and
melancholy as they have made me. I loved life; I loved men; I loved
laughter and games and the open air. All things that they have
forgotten. So from now I shall come back to one or two. I am lonely when
they see me so solemnly."

Another thing he said: "They are making life complicated now. To lead a
good life, to be happy, to manage the world, only the simplest things
are needed--love, unselfishness, tolerance."

"Can I go with you and be with you always?" Wilbraham asked.

"Do you really want that?" he said.

"Yes," said Wilbraham, bowing his head.

"Then you shall come and never leave me again. In three days from now."

Then he kissed Wilbraham on the forehead and went away.

I think that Wilbraham himself became conscious as he told me this part
of his story of the difference between the seen and remembered figure
and the foolish, inadequate reported words. Even now, as I repeat a
little of what Wilbraham said, I feel the virtue and power slipping
away. But on that day when I sat beside Wilbraham's bed the conviction
in his voice and eyes held me so that, although my reason kept me back,
my heart told me that he had been in contact with some power that was a
stronger force than anything that I myself had ever known.

But I have determined to make no personal comment on this story. I am
here simply as a narrator of fact.

Wilbraham told me that after his guest left him he sat there for some
time in a dream. Then he sat up, startled as though some voice, calling,
had wakened him, with an impulse that was like a fire suddenly blazing
up and lighting the dark places of his brain. I imagine that all
Wilbraham's impulses in the past, chivalrous, idealistic, foolish, had
been of that kind--sudden, of an almost ferocious energy and
determination, blind to all consequences. He must go out at once and
tell every one of what had happened to him.

I once read a story somewhere about some town that was expecting a great
visitor. Everything was ready, the banners hanging, the music prepared,
the crowds waiting in the street.

A man who had once been for some years at the court of the expected
visitor, saw him enter the city, sombrely clad, on foot. Meanwhile, his
chamberlain entered the town in full panoply with the trumpets blowing
and many riders in attendance. The man who knew the real king ran to
every one telling the truth, but they laughed at him and refused to
listen. And the real king departed quietly as he had come.

It was, I suppose, an influence of this kind that drove Wilbraham now.

What followed might, I think, have been to some extent averted, had his
appearance been different. London is a home of madmen, and casually
permits any lunacy, so that public peace is not endangered. Had poor
Wilbraham looked a fanatic, with pale face, long hair, ragged clothes,
much would have been forgiven him, but for a staid, middle-aged
gentleman, well-dressed, well-groomed, what could be supposed but
insanity, and insanity of a very ludicrous kind?

He put on his coat and went out. From this moment his account was
confused. His mind, as he spoke to me, kept returning to that visitor.
What happened after his guest's departure was vague and uncertain to
him, largely because it was unimportant. He does not know what time it
was when he went out, but I gather it must have been about midnight.
There were still people in Piccadilly.

Somewhere near the Berkeley Hotel he stopped a gentleman and a lady. He
spoke, I am sure, so politely that the man he addressed must have
supposed that he was asking for a match, or an address, or something of
the kind. Wilbraham told me that very quietly he asked the gentleman
whether he might speak to him for a moment, that he had something very
important to say; that he would not, as a rule, dream of interfering in
any man's private affairs, but that the importance of his communication
outweighed all ordinary conventions; that he expected that the gentleman
had hitherto, as had been his own case, felt much doubt about religious
questions, but that now all doubt was once and for ever over, that----

I expect that at that fatal word "religious" the gentleman started as
though he had been stung by a snake, felt that this mild-looking man was
a dangerous lunatic and tried to move away. It was the lady with him, so
far as I can discover, who cried out, "Oh, poor man, he's ill!" and
wanted at once to do something for him.

By this time a crowd was beginning to collect, and as the crowd closed
around the central figures more people gathered upon the outskirts and,
peering through, wondered what had happened, whether there was an
accident, whether it was a "drunk," whether there had been a quarrel,
and so on.

Wilbraham, I fancy, began to address them all, telling them his great
news, begging them with a desperate urgency to believe him. Some
laughed, some stared in wide-eyed wonder, the crowd was increasing, and
then, of course, the inevitable policeman, with his "Move on, please,"
appeared.

How deeply I regret that Wilbraham was not there and then arrested. He
would be alive and with us now if that had been done. But the policeman
hesitated, I suppose, to arrest any one as obviously a gentleman as
Wilbraham, a man, too, as he soon perceived, who was perfectly sober,
even though he was not in his right mind.

Wilbraham was surprised at the policeman's interference. He said that
the last thing that he wished to do was to create any disturbance, but
that he could not bear to let all these people go to their beds without
giving them a chance of realizing first that everything was now altered,
that he had had the most wonderful news.

The crowd was dispersed, and Wilbraham found himself walking alone with
the policeman beside the Green Park.

He must have been a very nice policeman, because, before Wilbraham's
death, he called at the nursing-home and was very anxious to know how
the poor gentleman was getting on.

He allowed Wilbraham to talk to him, and then did all he could to
persuade him to walk home and go to bed. He offered to get him a taxi.
Wilbraham thanked him, said he would do so himself, and bade him
good-night, and the policeman, seeing that Wilbraham was perfectly
composed and sober, left him.

After that the narrative is more confused. Wilbraham apparently walked
down Knightsbridge and arrived at last somewhere near the Albert Hall.
He must have spoken to a number of different people. One man, a
politician apparently, was with him for a considerable time, but only
because he was so anxious to emphasize his own views about the
Government. Another was a journalist, who continued with him for a while
because he scented a story for his newspaper. Some people may remember
that there was a garbled paragraph about a "Religious Army Officer" in
the Daily Record.

He stayed at a cabman's shelter for a time and drank a cup of coffee and
told the little gathering there his news. They took it very calmly. They
had met so many queer things in their time that nothing seemed odd to
them.

His account becomes clearer again when he found himself a little before
dawn in the park and in the company of a woman of the town and a
drunken, broken-down pugilist. I saw both these persons afterwards and
had some talk with them. The pugilist had only the vaguest sense of what
had happened. Wilbraham was a "proper old bird," and had given him half
a crown to get his breakfast with. They had all slept together under a
tree, and he had made some rather voluble protests because the other two
would talk so continuously and prevented his sleeping. It was a warm
night and the sun had come up behind the tree "surprisin' quick."

The woman was another story. She was quiet and reserved, dressed in
black with a neat little black hat with a green feather in it. She had
yellow, fluffy hair, and bright, childish, blue eyes, and a simple,
innocent expression. She spoke very softly and almost in a whisper. She
spoke of her life quite calmly as though she had been a governess or a
waitress at a tea-shop. So far as I could discover, she could see
nothing odd in Wilbraham, nor in anything that he had said. She was the
one person in all the world who had understood him completely and found
nothing out of the way in his talk. Strange when you come to think of
it. The one person in the world.

She had liked him at once, she said. "I could see that he was kind," she
added earnestly, as though to her that was the most important thing in
all the world. No, his talk had not seemed odd to her. She had believed
every word that he had said. Why not? You could not look at him and not
believe what he said.

Of course, it was true. And why not? She had known lots of things
funnier than that in her sordid life. What was there against it? She had
always thought that there was something in what the parsons said, and
now she knew it. It had been a great help to her, what the gentleman had
told her. Yes, and he had gone to sleep with his head in her lap--and
she had stayed awake all night thinking--and he had woken up just in
time to see the sunrise. Some sunrise that was, too!

That was a curious little fact, that all three of them, even the
battered pugilist, should have been so deeply struck by that sunrise.
Wilbraham on the last day of his life, when he hovered between
consciousness and unconsciousness, kept recalling it as though it had
been a vision.

"The sun--and the trees suddenly green and bright like glittering
swords--and the sky pale like ivory. See, now the sun is rushing up,
faster than ever, to take us with him--up, up, leaving the trees like
green clouds beneath us--far, far beneath us----"

The woman said it was the finest sunrise she had ever seen; and, at
once, when she saw it, she began to think of a policeman. He'd be moving
them on, naturally, and what would he say when he found her there with a
gentleman of the highest class? Say that she had been robbing him, of
course. She wanted to move away, but he insisted on going with her, and
they woke up the pugilist, and the three of them moved down the park.

He talked to her all the time about his plans. He was looking
dishevelled now, and unshaven and dirty. She suggested that he should go
back to his flat. No, he wished to waste no time. Who knew how long he
had got? It might be only a day or two. He would go to Covent Garden and
talk to the men there.

She was confused as to what happened after that. When they got to the
market, the carts were coming in and the men were very busy.

She saw the gentleman speak to one of them very earnestly, but he was
very busy and pushed him aside. He spoke to another, who told him to
clear out.

Then he jumped on to a box, and almost the last sight she had of him was
his standing there in his soiled clothes, a streak of mud on his face,
his arms outstretched and crying: "It's true! It's true! Stop just a
moment! You must hear me!"

Some one pushed him off the box. The pugilist rushed in then, cursing
them and saying that the man was a gentleman, and had given him
half-a-crown, and then some hulking great fellow fought the pugilist and
there was a regular mêlée. Wibraham was in the middle of them, was
knocked down and trampled upon. No one meant to hurt him, I think. They
all seemed very sorry afterwards.

He died two days after being brought into the nursing-home. He was very
happy just before he died, pressed my hand, and asked me to look after
the girl.

"Isn't it wonderful," were his last words to me, "that it should be true
after all?"


As to Truth, who knows? Truth is a large order. This is true as far as
Wilbraham goes, every word of it. Beyond that? Well, it must be jolly to
be so happy as Wilbraham was.



THE END




Project Gutenberg Australia


